TheCenter for Adolescent Research in Schools Cognitive	  BehavioralTreatment(CBT)ForAnxietyManual TheCenter	  for	  Adolescent	  Research in Schools Cognitive	  BehavioralTreatment(CBT)ForAnxietyManual Acknowledgements The CARS Cognitive Behavioral Treatment	  Manual for Anxiety (CARS CBT Anxiety) includes ideas from CBT manuals developed by Phillip C. Kendall, Ph.D., Muniya	  Choudhury, M.A., Jennifer Hudson, Ph.D., & Alicia	  Webb, M.S. (The C.A.T. Project, 2002); Robert	  Friedberg, Ph.D. and Jessica	  McClure, PsyD (The Clinical Practice of Cognitive Therapy for Children and Adolescents: The Nuts and Bolts, 2002); and Debra	  Hope, Ph.D. Richard G. Heimberg, Ph.D., Harlan R. Juster, Ph.D and Cynthia, L. Turk, Ph.D. (Managing Social Anxiety Client	  Workbook,	  2000). The	  modifications are designed to give school mental health professionals more flexibility with regard to the length and frequency of the sessions, as well as the activities that	  facilitate student	  learning within sessions. The majority of the manual was written, assembled, and revised by Dr. Julie S. Owens, Ph.D., as part	  of the CARS research project	  and the CARS School Mental Health Team. These materials have been developed to assist	  school	  personnel in their efforts to improve support	  for students with emotional/behavioral disabilities and those at	  high risk. Downloading single personal copies is permissible; however, photocopying multiple copies of these materials for sale is forbidden without	  expressed written permission by the Center for Adolescent	  Research in Schools. To obtain a	  personal copy of this and related manuals and materials, visit	  www.ies-..cars.org. The Center was supported by a	  grant	  from the Institute of Education Science, U.S. Department	  of Education (R324C08006). Opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not	  necessarily reflect	  the position of the U.S. Department	  of Education, and such endorsements should not	  be inferred. For more information, contact	  Center Directors Drs.	  Lee 	  Kern	  (ek6@Lehigh.edu),StevenEvans(evanss3@ohio.edu),	  or 	  Tim	  Lewis	  (lewistj@missouri.edu).	  Suggested Citation: Center for Adolescent	  Research in Schools (2014). The CARS cognitive behavioral treatment	  for anxiety manual. Bethlehem, PA: Center for Adolescent	  Research in Schools,	  Lehigh University ©	  Center for Adolescent Research in Schools,	  Lehigh	  University. Table of Contents Topic Page Manual Overview.......................................................................................................................3 Welcome And Introductions .....................................................................................................6 Phase	  1 Overview .....................................................................................................................10 Understanding Anxiety .............................................................................................................11 Understanding the Connection between Thoughts Feelings & Behaviors ...............................21 Rating Feeling Intensity ............................................................................................................27 Developing a Fear Hierarchy.....................................................................................................32 Phase	  2 Overview .....................................................................................................................38 Relaxation	  Techniques..............................................................................................................40 Identifying 	  Automatic 	  Thoughts ...............................................................................................46 Challenging Automatic Thoughts..............................................................................................49 Self-..evaluation	  & Self-..Reward ..................................................................................................52 Phase	  3 Overview .....................................................................................................................55 Orientation to Exposure Tasks..................................................................................................57 Individual	  Exposure 	  Tasks.........................................................................................................70 Appendix Table of Contents......................................................................................................73 Orientation Appendix ...............................................................................................................74 Phase	  1	  Appendices..................................................................................................................75 Phase	  2	  Appendices..................................................................................................................87 Phase	  3	  Appendices.................................................................................................................101 MANUAL OVERVIEW Introduction In 	  this manual,	  you will find a set of activities	  taken from evidence-..based	  interventions 	  for	  studentswithanxiety-..related 	  problems.	  The 	  CBT 	  Anxiety intervention should be provided	  by professionals with	  a graduate degree in	  a mental	  health 	  discipline 	  (counseling, 	  social	  work, 	  psychology).	  The procedures in	  this manual	  are based on the assumption that	  the student	  has already	  mastered the concepts in phase one of	  the ISG manual (i.e., they	  understand the	  problem.solving	  process	  and have	  identified ideal self-..goals).	  This intervention	  is divided	  into	  three phases. Within each phase, you will find several topics and activities.	  The topics do	  not have to	  be completed	  in	  separate sessions, but they	  should be	  completed in the	  sequence	  listed. Within each topic,	  you will	  see	  the	  objectives	  that you should achieve, the	  materials	  needed and the	  time frame for	  each activity.	  You	  will also	  see bold	  face type and italicized 	  type.	  The	  bold	  face	  type indicates what you (the 	  counselor)	  should say	  to the students.	  The italicized	  type offers you	  additional information	  and	  ideas	  that you	  can	  use if you	  choose. All other type is general information. The first	  phase involves students learning about	  anxiety	  and how it can be	  managed (Knowledge	  Acquisition).	  The second phase involves 	  teaching 	  the students	  specific	  skills	  for coping	  with their anxiety (Skills	  Acquisition) and the	  third phase involves helping students apply these skills in their	  daily	  lives (Skills	  Application).	  The first	  two phases may	  be provided to students in a	  group or individual	  meetings.	  Theexposure	  activities	  inthe	  third phase	  require brief individual	  sessions 	  (15 to 	  30 	  minutes)withindividual students	  orstudentdyads.	  More details about each phase are provided below. Phase	  1 During the first phase, students learn about	  the nature of	  anxiety; understand	  the connection between	  thoughts, feelings, and	  behaviors and	  develop	  avocabulary foreach;learn 	  torate 	  the 	  intensity 	  of	  their	  anxiety, and create	  a	  hierarchy of their fears. After students	  have	  demonstrated	  the above	  knowledge and have	  created a	  fear hierarchy, they move to Phase 2. Phase	  2 During the second	  phase, students learn	  several skills to	  help	  them better manage anxiety. The skill set includes 	  relaxation 	  techniques; identifying 	  and	  modifying negative self-..talk; and self-..evaluation and reward. Skill development will occur through	  discussion, modeling	  of skills	  by	  the	  group leader,	  and through role plays. After students have demonstrated	  each of these skills	  in mildly	  anxiety-..provoking situations (e.g., role	  plays	  or	  real	  situations),	  they move to Phase	  3. Phase	  3 During the third	  phase, students will apply and	  practice	  the	  newly	  learned skills	  during exposures to the anxiety-..provoking situations that	  are listed on their	  fear	  hierarchy.	  The practice of new skills takes place through	  role plays and	  in 	  vivo (real	  life)	  exposure	  tasks	  and continues	  until the	  student can (a) apply the	  skills	  in highly anxiety-..provoking situations,	  (b)	  has reduced 	  avoidance 	  of	  such 	  situations,	  and(c) hasimproved	  functioningin	  previously-..impaired 	  domains.	  Homework It is 	  common 	  for	  CBT groups	  like	  this	  one	  to have	  homework	  for students. These	  homework assignments frequently include asking students to	  complete worksheets	  in between sessions	  when confronted with anxiety-..provoking situations. We recommend that you do not give such	  handwritten	  assignments	  in 	  these 	  school-..based	  groups.	  The information on these sheets can be very	  confidential and quite	  embarrassing	  for a student	  if	  discovered by	  a peer.	  In addition, many students	  are	  fairly careless	  with their belongings	  and	  this increases 	  the 	  risk	  of	  a	  breach 	  of	  confidentiality.	  Although 	  we 	  realize 	  that	  homework completion	  can	  increase the effectiveness of this intervention, we believe that in	  a school setting the risks outweigh	  the benefits. Despite this recommendation, 	  we also give	  school mental health professional the	  flexibility to make exceptions to this rule on a case-..by-..case	  basis.	  For example, in some	  cases, the student	  is agreeable, the risks have been discussed with the student, and a plan	  to	  minimize those risks has	  been developed. Nonetheless, having students think	  about	  and implement	  therapeutic	  concepts in between	  meetingswith	  you is 	  important	  and 	  can 	  facilitate 	  treatment	  success. Thus, instead	  of having students	  complete worksheets	  independently,	  you	  are encouraged	  to	  conduct brief “check-..ins” 	  with 	  each 	  student 	  once 	  between 	  each session. This can	  occur flexibly, for example, when	  the student arrives in	  the morning before the first class, in between classes, during a study hall, during a lunch 	  period, 	  or	  15 	  minutesbeforethe student leavesschool. During thesebrief “check-..ins”, 	  counselors 	  should 	  engage 	  in a process, called	  ReCCaP (which stands	  for	  Review, Complete the Log, Connect to	  Treatment, and Plan).	  The 	  ReCCaP activities	  are	  described in more	  detail below. If 	  you 	  are 	  unable 	  to 	  complete a ReCCaP Log with	  students between	  sessions, start each	  session	  by having	  students	  complete	  a	  ReCCaP Log. These	  logs	  will be	  reviewed by the	  CARS	  SMC during your weekly consultation and data review	  sessions. Student Folders Because students will be completing worksheets during sessions and	  between	  sessions	  (i.e., with you, during	  ReCCaPPs), each student should have	  a	  folder for their	  work.	  ORIENTATION SESSION The purpose of the orientation	  session is	  to introduce	  the	  students	  to the	  format of the group	  and	  to each other. The counselor should	  use this session	  to	  set the tone for	  the group (informal, supportive, interesting, and fun). Time: 15-..30	  minutes	  (depending	  on the	  ice	  breaker	  activity	  you choose) Objectives for this Orientation Session • Students will understand	  the goal of the group • Students will be able to describe group rules • Students will understand	  what confidentiality is and its 	  limits Materials • Optional: Student Folders (to show	  where confidential work will be kept) • Optional:White board/Chalk Board (for highlighting 	  important	  concepts) • Materials for Icebreaker Activity (see Appendix page 74) Welcome [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Welcome to 	  the 	  first	  day 	  of 	  group!	  The	  goalsofthis group	  are(1) tolearn 	  how 	  our 	  thoughts,	  feelings 	  and behaviorswork	  together, and(2)	  to 	  learnhow to	  cope with	  thingsthatarestressfulin	  our	  lives.	  We 	  are going	  to	  talk	  about these things in	  a	  couple of minutes. Before we do	  I want to	  go	  over	  a	  few things. Review with group members: • Group	  Rules: Group	  rules should	  be set before the first session. Rules and	  related 	  consequences 	  should 	  be 	  explained and	  may	  be role-..played. A	  sign listing the	  rules	  may	  be	  posted in the	  room to serve	  as	  a reminder. • Confidentiality:	  Confidentiality 	  should 	  be 	  defined 	  and 	  its 	  importance discussed	  with	  members of the group. The basic expectation	  is that students	  do not discuss or mention	  anything	  that is shared	  in	  group	  outside of the group	  sessions. Students who	  break this trust may	  be asked	  to	  leave the group. • Logistics	  ofgroup	  sessions:	  Review 	  the 	  standing 	  time 	  and 	  location 	  for 	  the group	  meetings, how the leader will communicate	  changes	  to students, expectations	  for attendance	  and informing the	  group leader of	  conflicts. Introductions [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Let’s	  take the next couple minutes	  to	  introduce ourselves to	  each	  other. Please just state your	  first name and	  anything	  else you	  wish to say about yourself. I will begin. My name is _________________	  and	  _________________.	  Continue with	  introductions. At this point you	  may	  wish	  to	  do	  an	  ice breaker activity. There are some examples	  of these activities	  in the	  Appendix for Orientation Session (page 74), but	  you may use one of your own	  if you	  wish. The activity	  should	  be designed	  simply to get	  the	  students	  talking, enjoying their interactions	  and feeling comfortable. Overview	  of CBT Anxiety [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: As you know, there	  are	  many types of feelings	  or	  emotions.	  Sometimeswefeel theseemotions very	  intensely	  and	  other	  times we do	  not feel them at all. [With 	  Group]: Brainstorm types of emotions. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Sometimes	  these emotions help	  us do	  wonderful things.	  For 	  example,	  if 	  you 	  can 	  care 	  about	  another 	  person 	  and 	  feel 	  happy 	  or 	  sad about their	  happiness	  or	  sadness, you	  are likely	  to	  treat them well and	  do	  nice things 	  for 	  them.	  On 	  the 	  other 	  hand,	  sometimes 	  people 	  lose 	  control 	  ofsome of	  their 	  emotions 	  and 	  do 	  things 	  that	  they 	  regret	  or 	  get	  them 	  into 	  trouble.	  For example, if someone	  gets very angry about something a teacher says, that person	  may	  say	  things or	  do	  things in	  class that get them into	  serious trouble. [With 	  Group]: First, 	  identify 	  situations in 	  which a	  feeling 	  or	  an 	  emotion helped	  someone do	  something nice or helpful. Then, identify	  other situations	  in which a	  feeling or	  an emotion led to 	  inappropriate 	  behavior. Sometimes it is easier for students to identify these	  situations in others rather	  than in themselves.	  Thus, you can have	  student report	  situations 	  about othersthey	  haveobserved	  (e.g.,family	  members, friends, characters on TV). As participation	  increases, have students try	  to report	  situations about	  themselves. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  As I	  said 	  before,	  the goals of thisgroup	  are (1)to learnhow thethoughts,	  feelings 	  and 	  behaviorsassociated	  with	  stress	  and	  anxiety,as	  wellas	  howthoughts,	  feelings 	  and 	  behaviorsareconnected,and	  (2)	  to 	  learn how to	  cope with	  stress	  and anxiety	  in our lives so that we can achieve our	  Ideal Self Goals [With 	  Group]: Asneeded,reviewideal	  selfgoalsfrom ISG. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We’re going to complete three phases together. In	  the 	  first	  phaseyoulearn 	  all	  about 	  anxiety 	  (what 	  happens 	  when 	  you’re 	  anxious and	  why). If	  the 	  students 	  are 	  referring 	  to 	  anxiety 	  with 	  another	  word, 	  such 	  as 	  stress, 	  panic, nervousness, it may	  be helpful to	  use that term as well. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  In 	  the 	  second 	  phase,	  we’re 	  going 	  to 	  learn 	  skills 	  for managing the uncomfortable thoughts and feelings that go with anxiety. In the third 	  phase,	  we’ll 	  put	  these 	  new 	  skills 	  into 	  practice.	  Convey that throughout this process, you	  will work as	  a	  team, within the	  group and	  with	  you.You	  willofferup	  somenew termsand ideas.	  They 	  should 	  share 	  their	  reactions to these	  ideas.	  They should also practice	  the	  skills and then offer	  feedback	  about what works and	  what doesn’t work.	  You will	  support	  them as they try out	  their	  new skills and	  tweak them to	  fit their unique situation. Optional Activity to build engagement	  and motivation for change (~30-..45 minutes) Motivational Interviewing Four-..Square 	  Discussion: As the group leader, divide a large paper or white board into fourths by drawing a	  vertical and horizontal line through the middle of the paper. (See 	  figure 	  below).	  As you ask the following questions, write the student’s responses in the corresponding box and be sure to make the lists of students’ responses	  longer for 	  boxes	  2 and 4. For 	  box	  1(upperleft	  quadrant),askthestudents “What	  aresomeofthe ‘pros’ offeeling anxious? Examples include “it	  could help you study for a	  test,” “it	  could help you move out	  of the way of danger,” “a	  little bit	  of anxiety could help you practice more of perform better” For 	  box	  2(upperright	  quadrant),askthestudents “What	  aresomeofthe ‘cons’ ofbeing feeling anxious and avoiding situations?	  Examples include “too much anxiety can make you perform poorly” “if you avoid situations because of anxiety you will miss out	  on fun activities” “too much anxiety can make you procrastinate/avoid doing any work” “anxiety can make you freeze up in a	  situation and make you look stupid” What	  are some of the unfortunate consequences? For 	  box	  3(lowerleft	  quadrant),askthestudents “What	  isdifficult	  about	  changingthe thoughts, feelings, or behaviors associated with anxiety? What	  do you not	  like about	  having to change?” For box 4, ask the students (lower right	  quadrant) “What	  might	  be 	  good about	  changing the thoughts, feelings, or behaviors associated with anxiety? What	  are some benefits of changing?” Then engage them in a	  discussion that	  elicits change talk and builds and/or reinforces their motivation for changing. Focus on reflecting the positive possibilities of change. Reflect	  that	  the work may be difficult	  but	  that	  the benefits may outweigh the costs. The therapist	  should ask students what	  they noticed when they went	  through each list	  and compared the list. Point	  out	  that	  boxes 2 and 4 are longer, and that	  a	  small about	  of anxiety can be helpful, but	  too much anxiety is problematic/gets in the way of good performance. Note: this can be a	  long discussion for students. We have found that	  some sort	  of movement	  break is helpful to break it	  up! To	  end	  thegroup, give 	  any 	  instructions 	  for	  attending 	  the 	  next	  meeting 	  or	  proceed to Phase 1	  activities. PHASE 1: KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION There are four topics in 	  this 	  section • Understanding Anxiety • Understanding the Connection	  between Thoughts, Feelings, and	  Behaviors • Feeling Intensity Ratings • Creating a Fear Hierarchy The topics do not have to	  be completed	  in	  separate sessions,	  but they should be completed in the	  sequence	  listed.	  Each	  will likely take 15-..30	  minutes,	  depending on	  the activities	  you choose	  to complete	  for each topic.	  Objectives of Phase 1: • Students will state	  in their own words	  how anxiety can be	  helpful and harmful • Students will identify thoughts, feelings, physiological symptoms, and	  behaviors associated	  with	  anxiety • Students will provide examples of how thoughts influence feelings and	  behaviors • Students will rate the intensity of their anxiety across a	  variety of situations	  • Student will create a	  fear hierarchy of the situations that will be addressed through exposure	  tasks To	  determine if each student is	  ready	  to move	  to Phase	  2, Counselors/Group facilitators will	  have students	  complete	  the	  End of Phase	  1	  Assessment (see	  page	  86). Topic 1: Understanding Anxiety Time: 15	  minutes	  with no activity; 30	  minutes	  with an activity	  (recommended) Outline • Define anxiety • Normalize anxiety and	  discuss how it helps us • Describe the components of anxiety o Physiological Symptoms o Feelings o Thoughts o Behaviors Materials Needed (See Appendix pages 76-..77 for	  handouts) • White board/chalk board • White paper and colored pens/pencils/markers • Optional: Poster board/butcher paper • Optional: Upside Down U-..Shaped	  Curve of Anxiety Handout (page	  76) • Optional Physiology of Anxiety Handout (page	  77) [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Welcome back! In 	  order 	  to 	  better 	  cope 	  with 	  anxiety,	  we need to first understand what it is. How	  would each of you define or describe anxiety? [With 	  Group]: Let students	  offer ideas. You	  could	  write the ideas on	  a	  white board	  to show that	  each idea is valid and important. You	  could	  use the following	  definition	  to	  summarize their responses. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Anxiety has been	  defined as	  a	  sudden rush of	  intense 	  fear 	  or nervousness often	  associated	  with	  feelings of impending	  doom or	  negative thoughts, and	  accompanied	  by	  several physical symptoms (e.g., muscle tension, sweaty	  palms, rapid heart rate, shortness	  of	  breath, chest tightness,). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Although there 	  are 	  commonalities 	  in 	  the 	  way 	  people experience	  anxiety, anxiety can also look and feel really different for different people. [With 	  Group]:	  Use their examples to	  show commonalities across students as well as how each student reported unique	  thoughts	  experience when anxious. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  I	  wantus to	  talk	  aboutthreethings related	  to anxiety. First,	  anxiety 	  and 	  stress 	  are 	  common.	  Write this on the board under #1.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Everyone experiences	  stress	  every	  day, and	  up	  to one in	  four	  teenagers has significant difficulty	  with	  anxiety, probably	  even	  more so than adults. What are ways that people experience anxiety and stress every day? The	  good	  news is that we	  now know a lot about anxiety	  and	  we can	  help	  you	  learn	  some strategies	  to	  better	  manage it. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor];	  Second,you	  may	  notknow this,	  but	  anxiety is actually	  a	  good thing.	  Write this on the board under #2. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  It probably doesn’t seem like it to	  you	  now or	  when	  you’re in	  the middle of	  a	  panic. But can	  anyone guess	  how anxiety	  might be helpful to	  us? [With 	  Group]: Let students	  offer ideas. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Anxiety serves two good purposes. One purpose is to 	  motivate 	  us.	  Write this on the board as part of #2. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Think	  about a	  test, a	  job	  interview, a	  project, or	  a	  sports	  performance. If	  wehave just	  the 	  right	  amount	  of 	  anxiety 	  (a	  little nervousness, a	  little apprehension),this will	  serve 	  to 	  help 	  us 	  study,	  practice 	  and prepare. If you	  have too	  little anxiety, you	  won’t care and	  you	  won’t prepare. If you	  have too	  much	  anxiety, you	  may	  be overwhelmed	  and	  stuck, not sure what to 	  do.	  So 	  there 	  is 	  an 	  optimal 	  amount	  of 	  anxiety.	  Too 	  little	  isnotgoodandtoo much is not good. Show the	  handout of Upside Down U-..Shaped	  Curve of Anxiety	  (see	  Appendix	  page 76). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Right now, you can probably think of many situations	  where you have too much. The skills	  you learn in this 	  group 	  will 	  help you	  move your	  anxiety	  levels	  back	  to	  the helpful range. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  other purpose	  of anxiety has to	  do	  with	  safety. Anxiety actually	  protects 	  us. Write this on the board as part of #2. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Does anybody know	  how? When our body needs to prepare to	  fight something	  or	  flee from something	  (e.g., like 	  a wooly mammoth in 	  cave 	  man 	  times),	  all	  of 	  the 	  systems in 	  our 	  body 	  work 	  together 	  to 	  help 	  us 	  take action	  to	  survive. This	  is	  called	  the fight or	  flight system. Think	  about if	  you	  were crossing	  the	  street, and	  all of a	  sudden	  you	  noticed	  that a	  large	  truck	  was coming	  your	  way. What would you do? Your anxiety or fear of being run over would motivate you to run to the side of the road (flee). If 	  you 	  didn’t 	  have anxiety	  about this	  situation, you	  would	  linger	  in	  the road	  and	  get run	  over. If you	  have too	  much	  anxiety, you	  may	  panic	  and	  not make a	  quick	  decision. Again, refer to	  the Upside Down	  U-..Shaped	  Curve	  of Anxiety. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So, anxiety, when	  it’s	  working	  well, alerts	  us	  to	  danger	  in	  the environment and	  helps us body	  prepare to	  bring	  us to	  safety. We’ll get back	  to	  what our	  body	  is doing in a 	  moment. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Third, anxiety	  has	  four main components Write this on the board #3.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Whenever you are anxious, you have physiological symptoms, feelings/emotions, thoughts, and	  behaviors. Write each on	  the board as part of #3. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Let’s	  talk	  about each	  one. Optional activities to help student	  understand the components of anxiety 1. Lay out	  a	  large piece of butcher paper. Have someone drawn the outline of a	  body. Once the body outline is finished, start	  discussing the physiological symptoms associated with anxiety and the fight/flight	  system. Allow students to use different	  colored markers to visually depict	  the location and the experience of the symptoms. Leave a	  space to the side of the body to be able to write down several emotion words associated with anxiety (e.g., nervous, terrified, frightened, afraid). Discuss the thoughts associated with anxiety and allow students to put	  thought	  bubbles above its head. Leave a	  space to the side of the body to be able to write down several behaviors associated with anxiety (e.g., avoidance, freezing, refusal). Once the diagram is complete, reflect	  on how frazzled and stressed the figure looks. This serves to validate the student’s feelings of anxiety and panic. You could also discuss how the calming system/parasympathetic system turns off all of these physiological symptoms. Keep this drawing because it	  is helpful to refer to it	  at	  various other points in the treatment. For example, with each new coping skill, you can discuss which symptoms, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that	  the skill addresses. Or you can create another figure later to show the coping thoughts and the improvements that	  the students are making (can lengthen the session by 10-..15 minutes) 2. Give each student	  their own piece of paper and makers. Have them drawn a	  person or an outline of a	  person. As you discuss each component	  of anxiety, have each student	  depict, on the person or on the page, their own experience. At	  the end, have each student	  show their page. This can demonstrate the commonalities of anxiety across students, but	  also that	  each person has their own unique experience of anxiety (can lengthen the session by 5-..10 minutes). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Physiological symptoms are the sensations	  you	  get in 	  your 	  body 	  when 	  you 	  are 	  anxious. Remember when you were	  running	  away from the truck in the road? When you get to the side of	  the road, what sensations	  are you likely	  to feel in your	  body? [With 	  Group]: Have the students describe what their body feels like after this, or another similar, threatening	  event. They	  can indicate 	  these 	  sensations 	  on 	  the drawing	  described	  in	  the activity	  box. Have the students participate in	  labeling	  the symptoms. Alternatively, you	  may	  show students the figure of the Physiology	  of Anxiety	  (see	  Appendix page 77). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Common symptoms are • heart pounding • heart racing • dizziness • nausea • smothering sensations • feeling a	  lump in the 	  throat • feeling a knot in	  your	  stomach • shakiness	  (hands, head, knees) • sweating • blurred	  vision • headaches • muscle tension or aches • tightness or	  pain	  in 	  the 	  chest • ringing	  in	  the ears • shortness	  of	  breath • diarrhea • flushing, blushing • tingling 	  in 	  the 	  fingers,	  toes,	  face • chills Showstudents	  the	  Physiology	  of Anxiety	  Handout (see	  Appendix page 77) if	  that	  would help them better understand these sensations. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  All of these	  symptoms occur	  because your	  body	  detected	  a	  threat and	  reacted	  to	  it. This is known	  as the fight or	  flight response. The	  technical reason	  that this happens is because	  your Sympathetic	  Nervous System turns	  on. From here on	  out, we’re going	  to	  refer	  to	  this	  as	  the ACTIVATION	  SYSTEM. [With 	  Group]: Ask students what they	  know about the fight or flight response. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Any time	  your body detects a threat, it activates all the 	  systems 	  of 	  your 	  body.	  In 	  most	  situations,	  this 	  is a	  good 	  thing.	  When 	  you’re in 	  the 	  road 	  and 	  the 	  truck is 	  coming,	  adrenaline surges	  through your	  body, your	  heart beats harder, and	  your	  lungs	  help	  you	  breathe more rapidly to get oxygen and	  blood	  to	  your	  large muscles	  to	  help	  you	  flee. This	  is	  why	  you	  experience pounding	  heart and shortness	  of	  breath. Because the blood in your	  body	  is	  going	  to	  your	  large muscles (thighs and	  upper	  arms), there is less blood	  in	  your	  head, hands, and	  feet. This is why	  you may experience	  tingling sensations or dizziness. So, you	  can	  see, all of	  these symptoms	  are there to	  protect you	  and	  bring	  you	  to	  safety. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  problem for many of your right now is that your ACTIVATION	  SYSTEMisstarting whenthereis	  nota	  realthreat (e.g.,	  in	  a	  social	  situation).	  Instead 	  your 	  body 	  is 	  telling 	  you 	  that	  there is a	  threat when	  there really	  isn’t a	  threat, at least not like 	  getting 	  run 	  over 	  by a 	  truck. [With 	  Group]: Ask students what they	  think about this idea. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  It’s 	  important 	  to 	  understand	  that your body	  also	  has a	  CALMING SYSTEM (the technical 	  term 	  is 	  the parasympathetic	  nervous system). Eventually, your	  body	  will say	  “Okay, we’re safe now, it’s	  time to	  calm down”	  and	  the CALMING SYSTEM takes	  over. Because there is	  still a	  lot of	  adrenaline in your	  system, this 	  process 	  can 	  take 	  15-..20	  minutes, but the body	  will not let the ACTIVATION	  SYSTEM go on forever. It’s important that you understand these	  two 	  systems,	  because 	  the 	  skills 	  we’re 	  going to	  learn 	  are 	  going to 	  help 	  youmake sure that your	  ACTIVATION	  SYSTSEM only turns on when there	  is a real threat for	  safety, and that you can activate your	  CALMING SYSTEM when you need to cope.	  [With 	  Group]: Ask students repeat what they	  have learned	  about both	  systems. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now,we’re going move on and talk 	  about	  the feelings	  or	  emotions	  associate with these physical symptoms. • The	  feelings or emotions associated	  with	  anxiety	  are typically	  stated	  with one word. [With 	  Group]:	  Havethestudentsparticipatein	  labeling	  the	  symptoms anxiety. Common feelings are o anxious, nervous, terrified, frightened, afraid, stressed, dread, worry, panic, irritability. • The	  thoughts associated	  with	  anxiety	  are often stated as	  a	  sentence and	  often	  characterized	  by	  worry	  and	  predictions	  that bad	  things	  are aboutto 	  happen.	  Has 	  anyone 	  ever 	  noticed 	  thoughts 	  like 	  this 	  that	  go through 	  our 	  heads 	  when 	  we’re 	  anxious? Praise	  students	  for their contribution and awareness. Create thought bubbles on	  the activity	  drawing	  and	  insert their statements. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Yes, when	  we’re anxious, our	  minds	  tend	  to focus	  on the 	  potentially 	  threatening 	  aspects 	  of 	  situations 	  (e.g.,	  what	  if 	  _______ happens?”),	  we 	  expect	  the 	  worst	  to 	  happen,	  we worry about ability	  to	  cope,	  our performance, or what someone else might think	  about us. Sometimes	  the thoughts 	  are 	  true 	  but	  more 	  often 	  they 	  represent	  our 	  worst	  fears,	  rather 	  than what actually happens. Common	  thoughts are “Something	  bad	  will happen and I won’t be able tohandle	  it”;	  “I’ll stumbleovermy	  wordsand	  lookdumb”;	  “He’ll 	  think I’m 	  stupid”;	  “They’llthinkI’mboring”;	  “I	  know 	  I’ll	  mess 	  up,” 	  “I’m 	  going 	  to freak	  out.” [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  A	  behavior is 	  what 	  we 	  do 	  when 	  we’re	  anxious; like	  our	  actions. What are some of	  the common	  behaviors	  associated	  with	  anxiety? Behavioral symptoms	  of	  anxiety may include	  avoidance, nail biting, shuffling feet, reduced eye	  contact, thumb sucking, compulsions, and an exaggerated startle	  response.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  most common	  and	  important behavior associated	  with	  anxiety	  is	  avoidance. Avoidance	  involves either not doing something that frightens	  you or	  doing it in a	  way	  that you stay	  away	  from the most frightening aspects of the anxiety-..provoking	  situation. There	  are	  several reasons	  that avoidance is	  important to	  understand. First,	  if	  you 	  avoid 	  the 	  anxiety-..providing	  situation	  you	  never	  getto	  test	  out	  if 	  your 	  thought	  (“I 	  know 	  I’ll 	  mess 	  up”)	  is 	  accurate 	  or actually	  going	  to	  happen. You	  never	  get to	  try	  it and	  see what actually	  happens. Thus, you	  continue to	  believe it and	  your	  body continues to	  perceive	  these	  situations as a	  threat, which	  means it continues to	  trigger	  your	  ACTIVATION SYSTEM. Second, avoiding	  the stressful situation	  is	  very	  rewarding	  because you	  can’t mess	  up	  if	  you	  never	  try. So, in 	  the 	  short 	  run 	  this 	  really seems	  likea	  goodstrategy.	  But	  a	  funny 	  thing 	  happens.	  The 	  more you	  avoid	  something, the bigger	  your	  fear	  about that situation	  gets. It 	  tends 	  to 	  build 	  and 	  build. Third,	  when 	  you 	  avoid 	  situations,	  you 	  never 	  get	  to 	  practice 	  coping	  skills. Think about your	  favorite sports	  star. He/she did not get to be as good	  as they	  are at that sport without practice. So	  you’ll need	  to 	  practice 	  coping 	  skills to	  get	  better 	  at	  them.	  If	  you 	  have 	  time 	  at 	  the 	  end 	  of 	  the 	  session 	  or	  you 	  want 	  an 	  interactive	  activityina separate	  session to help students	  gain repetition with these	  concepts, select an additional activity from the	  box on the	  next	  page. Activities to help students distinguish thoughts, feelings and behaviors 1. Blow up a	  beach ball that	  has different	  colored panels. With a	  permanent	  marker, write each of the following words on each panel: situation, thoughts, feelings, behavior. Throw ball back and forth (or around the group). Tell the students that	  whatever word their thumb lands on, they have to give an example of that	  component. This activity can be particularly good for students who have difficulty sitting still or need some physical activity (10 minute activity). 2. Have students write a	  poem or song that	  expresses their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in a	  given situation. When complete, have them and/or the group of students identify which parts represent	  thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. This activity can be good for groups that	  have students who are more introverted and have difficulty speaking up (20 minute activity). 3. Have scissors, glue, a	  poster board, and several age-..appropriate magazines available. Have students cut	  out	  pictures or words from magazines and paste them on the poster board to represent	  thoughts, feelings and actions (additional drawings, words, or art	  can be added). Discuss it	  with the student	  as he/she is making it	  or have them share it	  with the group. This	  activity can be particularly good for students who respond less well to didactic lectures. They often speak up more while they are engaged in this activity (20-..30 minute activity).	  4. Play a	  game of charades. Have a	  pile of index cards, each of which has a	  feeling word written on	  it. Take turns (either student	  and counselor, or the group of students), picking a	  card and acting it	  out. After each turn, discuss the cues (facial features, body language, actions) that	  helped to communicate each emotion. Discuss which cues are similar across emotions and which are more unique to specific emotions. Play another round. During this round, after each emotion is identified, have each student	  create a	  thought	  that	  might	  go with this emotion. Help the group can identify thoughts that	  are helpful and thoughts that	  are harmful. This activity can be particularly good for students who have difficulty sitting still or need some physical activity (10-..15 minute activity). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  hopefully	  now you	  can	  state in	  own	  words what anxiety 	  is 	  and how anxiety	  can	  be helpful and	  harmful. It might be a	  good	  task	  to 	  see 	  if 	  you 	  could 	  describe 	  this to a 	  friend 	  or a	  relative.	  I 	  hope 	  also 	  that	  you now can	  identify	  the thoughts, feelings, physiological symptoms, and	  behaviors associated	  with	  anxiety.	  Even 	  if 	  you’re 	  not	  having 	  any 	  trouble 	  with 	  stress 	  at	  the moment, this program	  provides useful strategies for dealing with everyday life stresses. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Oneway to help you make progress in this group,	  is to 	  start	  applying 	  theconceptslearned in	  group 	  to 	  your 	  everyday	  activities. To	  help	  you	  do	  this,my	  goalisto 	  find a 	  time 	  each 	  week 	  that	  you 	  and I	  can 	  meet	  briefly toconnectwhatwasdiscussed	  in	  group	  to	  your	  dailyactivities.	  Once 	  we get good	  at it, it should	  only	  take 5	  minutes. We’re going to call these brief meetings a	  “ReCCaP”	  because these letters	  will help	  remind	  us	  what to	  do. [With 	  Group]:	  Describe what ReCCaP stands for and	  show them the Phase 1	  ReCCaP Log	  (see Appendix page 78). ReCCaP for	  Topic 1: 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review a	  situation (e.g., that made	  them nervous) 2. Complete the Log: Have the student identify the thoughts, feelings, physiological sensations, and	  actions associated	  with	  his/her that occurred	  in 	  this 	  situation. 3. Connect to Treatment: Have	  the	  student connect this	  to what he/she learned 	  about	  anxiety	  in 	  session, 	  highlighting 	  the 	  body’s 	  reaction 	  and 	  the purpose of anxiety. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  how 	  he/shemay pay attention to these components	  of	  anxiety	  during 	  the 	  next	  situation. Group	  Leader/Counselor should always offer praise and	  encouragement for students	  who complete	  a ReCCaP. Focus	  on praising their	  effort	  in completing the	  task	  and discussion, rather	  than on the	  accuracy of	  the	  information that	  they remember	  from 	  the 	  session. TOPIC 2: Understanding the Connection Between Thoughts, Feelings, and	  Behaviors Time: 30	  minutes	  Outline • Using an	  example, describe a situation	  and	  the thoughts, feelings, and	  behaviors in	  that situation • Describe how	  our thoughts (not	  the situation)	  determine our	  feelings and behaviors Materials Needed (See	  Appendix Phase	  1 for	  Handouts) • White board/chalk board • Situations, Thoughts, Feelings, and	  Behavior Table (one	  for	  each student;	  see	  page	  79) • SpiralofAnxietyHandout (one	  for	  eachstudent;	  see 	  page 	  80) • Pens	  for students [With 	  Group]:	  Start this	  section	  with	  a	  review of the	  information	  in	  the	  last session. Ask	  questions	  of the	  group to assess	  their understanding and memory	  of the	  details.	  Praise	  students	  forany	  information 	  they 	  remember	  and 	  provide a	  brief	  summary	  of the	  concepts. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Today, we’re	  going	  to	  discuss the	  connections	  betweenthoughts,	  feelings,	  behaviors,	  and 	  the 	  situation.	  To	  do	  this,I’d 	  like 	  you to imagine 	  the 	  following 	  situation. Use the	  Situations, Thoughts, Feelings, and	  Behavior Table in 	  the 	  Appendix (page 79)	  and	  the table below to guide	  the	  discussion.	  You can provide	  handouts to each student or replicate the table on	  the board. Situation  Thought  Feeling  Behavior  Phone Rings  It’s	  my	  teacher  It’s	  my	  (girl)friend	  calling	  about a party	  this	  weekend  It’s	  the doctor with 	  news	  about	  my 	  Grandma  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  You	  are at home and	  the phone rings. Ok, so	  the phone ringing	  is the situation. Let’s say	  that your	  first thought is “It’s my	  teacher/principal.” 	  Some 	  people 	  might	  feel 	  scared 	  or 	  nervousifthis 	  is 	  what	  they 	  thought. Write this in the feelings box. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  And if they thought this, they might leave	  the	  room/house and	  not answer	  the phone or so	  their	  Mom couldn’t find	  them easily after the	  call. Write 	  this in 	  the behavior box. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  How about you? What would you	  feel if you	  thought it 	  was 	  your 	  teacher/principal? 	  What 	  would 	  you 	  do? [With 	  Group]: Allow student discussion. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Okay, so now	  let’s say you had a different thought aboutwho	  was calling.	  Who 	  else 	  could 	  be 	  calling? [With Group]: Allow students to	  offer ideas and	  select	  one	  idea (e.g., girlfriend/boyfriend, grandparent who	  is sick). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  What feeling would you have? Write one of the	  feelings box [be 	  sure 	  to 	  select 	  one 	  that is 	  different 	  than 	  the feeling 	  that	  was 	  written 	  following 	  the 	  teacher/principal	  example). Questions to help elicit feelings How	  would you	  feel? What emotion would you	  have? If 	  your	  body/stomach 	  could 	  talk, 	  what 	  would it	  say? If 	  you 	  body/stomach 	  had a 	  voice, 	  how 	  would 	  she 	  say 	  she 	  is feeling? [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  What might you do? Write 	  this in 	  the behavior box. Repeat several times with other ideas,	  writing each down. Activity for repetition: You can complete the task again with the following situation: You just	  went	  through the lunch line. You’re walking with your tray over to a	  table where there is one seat	  left. You know some of the students at	  that	  table and have sat	  with them before, but	  you don’t	  sit	  there every day. When you arrive, the student	  closest	  to the seat	  says “Sorry, this is saved for someone else” and goes back to eating their lunch and talking with friends. As you walk away, what	  thought/s do you have? Have the student	  identify a	  negative thought	  (e.g., they don’t	  like me anymore), and a	  more positive, coping thought	  (oh, well, I	  guess I	  need to get	  their earlier tomorrow). Then discuss the impact	  of the thoughts on feelings and behaviors. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Great. Now we have several examples. Let’s look back	  and	  see if we notice any	  patterns in	  what we wrote down. [With 	  Group]: • Discuss 	  which 	  happens 	  first, 	  thoughts 	  or	  feelings?	  Feelingsorbehaviors?	  • Discuss whether there were different situations or the same situation that	  produced	  all of these different feelings. • How	  did we get to so many different feelings and actions from the same situation? • Praise	  students	  for any	  insights	  and shape	  their contributions	  to point out the	  following: [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So, the same situation produced a	  variety of different feelings and	  behaviors, all based	  on	  the thought that emerged	  from the 	  situation or	  the interpretation	  of the situation. So	  it’s not the situation	  that determines our	  feelings and	  behaviors, it’s	  our interpretation or	  thoughts about the 	  situation 	  that	  determine 	  how 	  we 	  feel 	  and 	  act.	  That’s 	  interesting.	  What do	  you	  think	  about that?/What does	  that mean? [With 	  Group]: If 	  the 	  students 	  are 	  having 	  difficulty 	  making 	  this 	  connection, 	  consider	  using	  the analogies in	  the analogies box below. Analogies that	  can be helpful: 1.	  The baseball	  diamond (draw as you describe it): Home plate represents the situation. First	  base represents thoughts. Second base represents feelings. Third base represents behaviors. In every situation, “we’re going to cover all the bases” to understand how to cope. Activity: For active students, you can have students make big diamonds out	  of poster board (label and decorate them). Distribute them around the room. Have the student	  physically stand on each one as he/she describes each component. 2. The Flower Garden (draw as you describe it): The soil/ground represents the situation/what	  happens to you (Girls were whispering when you entered the classroom). The stem represents the thought	  that	  stems from the situation (I	  know they are talking about	  me. I	  know I’m going	  to say something stupid). The flower represents the feeling that	  is produced by these thoughts (i.e., worried, anxious, nervous) Draw a drooping or frazzled flower. Our job together is figure out	  how you can grow pretty and colorful flowers. We’re going to work on changing our thoughts about	  a	  situation to produce better feelings. Activity: Have the student	  create a	  flower (with soil, stem, and flower) based on a	  positive situation, identifying all the components and the connections between the two). Have the student	  create a	  flower (with soil, stem, and flower) based on a	  negative situation, identifying all the components and the connections between the two). Discuss the different	  flowers that	  are produced. Then return to the negative situation. Work together to discuss alternative stems (thoughts) that	  could occur in that	  situation. Discuss how those different	  thoughts could produce different	  flowers. Connect this concept to	  the student’s anxiety.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  This connection	  applies to	  your	  anxiety. Show them the	  Spiral of Anxiety Handout (see	  Appendix page 80). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  There	  is a situation	  and	  something	  about this situation makes	  us	  think it’s	  dangerous	  or	  bad things	  are going to happen. These thoughts trigger 	  our 	  ACTIVATION 	  SYSTEM 	  and 	  we 	  start	  to 	  feel 	  all 	  sorts 	  of uncomfortable physiological sensations. We take these symptoms as evidence that	  there 	  must	  be 	  some 	  threat	  present,	  even 	  if 	  we 	  are 	  not	  aware 	  of 	  exactly what it is that we are perceiving as threatening. Then, given	  the distressing	  thoughts 	  and 	  feelings,	  we 	  leave 	  the 	  situation 	  or 	  avoid 	  it.	  Remember,	  although these 	  sensations 	  can 	  be 	  quite 	  unpleasant	  and 	  distressing,	  they 	  are 	  just	  sensations	  and they	  are not dangerous. We need to help teach our	  body	  and	  brain	  that they	  are not dangerous and	  that we can	  cope with	  whatever	  is happening	  in	  the situation. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Do you think that if we could figure out how	  to change	  our	  thoughts, that we	  might be	  able	  to	  change	  how we	  feel, feel less anxious	  or	  nervous? If	  fact, that’s	  exactly	  what this	  program/group	  is	  about. We’re going to help you learn how to identify the situation, your thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. And when there is	  a	  thought or	  an interpretation of	  a	  situation that makes	  you	  feel nervous, you’re going	  to	  learn	  how to	  change these 	  negative 	  thoughts 	  into 	  more 	  positive 	  ones to 	  help 	  you 	  reduce 	  your anxiety. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Because this activity	  is so	  important, we’re going	  use this	  log as	  often	  as	  we can	  (e.g., in	  group	  and	  during	  any	  brief ReCCaPs).	  Eventually, this	  tool, along	  with	  the other	  skills	  we’re going	  to	  work	  on, will help you	  learn	  how to	  manage your	  anxiety	  before	  it 	  spins 	  out 	  of 	  control	  and how to	  calm yourself down	  if you’ve	  gotten	  really worked	  up. Work with	  each student to identify	  a time	  to meet	  to do this.	  Put all completed sheets	  in the	  student’s	  folder. ReCCaP for	  Topic 2:	  Meet with the student before the next session. 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review a	  situation (e.g., that made	  them nervous) 2. Complete the Log: Have the student identify the thoughts, feelings, physiological sensations, and	  actions associated	  with	  his/her that occurred	  in 	  this 	  situation. 3. Connect to	  Treatment: Have the student connect this to	  what he/she learned	  about anxiety in	  session, highlighting the connection	  between	  thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  how a 	  different	  thought	  may	  have 	  lead to different	  feelings and behaviors. Group	  Leader/Counselor should	  praise 	  the student for any	  progress	  on the	  above, reminding 	  him/her	  that	  recognizing 	  the 	  connection 	  between 	  thoughts, 	  feelings, and	  behavior is an	  important step	  in	  the treatment process. TOPIC 3: Rating Feeling Intensity Time: 15	  minutes	  Outline • Describe the anxiety rating scale • Connect different ratings to	  situations from the student’s life • Have students report on	  anxiety when	  calm and	  after thinking about an	  anxious	  event Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  1 for	  Handouts) • Anxiety Rating Scale (one for each student;	  see	  Appendix	  page 81) • “What’s Your Anxiety Rating Now?” Handout (one	  for	  each student;	  (see	  Appendix	  page	  82) • Pens	  for students [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now that you understand the	  difference	  between thoughts,	  feelings,	  and 	  behaviors,	  as 	  well 	  as 	  how 	  they 	  are 	  each 	  connected to each other, we’re	  going to start to learn how to gain more	  control over	  all three of them. Remember	  how in	  the beginning, we talked	  about how anxiety	  is	  actually	  adaptive, how it’s important 	  that 	  we 	  have some anxiety, but not too	  much, and not too little? So one way to gain control of our anxiety is to become better	  at knowing	  how much anxiety	  we are feeling. To	  do	  this, we need	  learn	  how to	  rate the intensity	  of anxiety. Look	  at this	  Anxiety Rating	  Scale. Distribute 	  copies 	  of	  scale;	  see 	  Appendixpage81.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Onthetop,there 	  is a	  rating 	  of 	  100.	  A 	  rating 	  of 	  100 represents	  the most anxious	  or	  panicked	  you’ve ever	  been. Can	  you	  think	  of	  that	  or 	  situation? [With 	  Group]: Have student write that down. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  What are some of the cues that tell you that you’re at a	  100	  rating	  (e.g., physiological sensations, feelings, thoughts, behaviors)? [With 	  Group]: Have students write that down. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  On the bottom, there is a rating of 0. This represents the 	  calmest,	  most	  relaxed 	  you’ve 	  everbeen.Can	  you	  think	  ofthat situation	  or	  time? [With 	  Group]: Have students write that down. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: What are some of the cues that tell you that you’re at a	  0	  rating? [With 	  Group]: Have students write that down. [Group Leader/Counselor]: Now, there	  are	  probably some	  situations that make	  you	  a	  little nervous, but it’s	  not that bad. These might fall in	  the 20-..40	  range. [With 	  Group]: Have students write down	  a	  few situations that fall in	  this range. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  When you’re feeling a level of nervousness that	  starts	  to get bothersome,	  then 	  you’re 	  moving 	  into 	  the 	  50-..60	  range. [With 	  Group]: Have students write down	  a	  few situations that fall in	  this range. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  And then 	  when 	  you’re 	  really 	  nervous 	  and 	  panicky,	  although	  it’s	  not the most anxious	  point, you’re in the 70-..90	  range. [With 	  Group]: Have students	  write down	  a	  few situations that fall in	  this range. You	  could	  also	  use the	  analogies in 	  the 	  box 	  below to help students understand	  intensity. Analogies that	  can be helpful: 1.	  Traffic 	  Light: To think	  about the intensity of your anxiety, you could think	  of a traffic light. The	  green 	  light	  represents	  when 	  you’re	  calm	  and 	  things	  are	  going	  well 	  for	  you,	  “all 	  systems	  go”.	  The	  yellow	  light	  represents	  when 	  you’re	  getting	  warning	  signals.	  Your	  anxiety	  is	  rising,	  you’re feeling it in your sweaty palms, your pounding heart, your shortness of breath, “look	  out	  I	  might	  blow”. The red	  light	  represents	  alarm or panic. You’re feeling out	  of control,	  overwhelmed, dizzy, like you might lose it or pass out. 2. Feeling Thermometer: Think	  about a thermometer. When you’re calm and things are going	  well 	  for	  you,	  the	  temperature is low. As you start to get warning signs of anxiety (sweaty palms,	  pounding heart,	  shortness	  of breath,	  dizziness),	  the temperature rises. And when you’re panicked, the temperature is	  high,	  in	  the fever zone or at	  the boiling point. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  let’s	  stop	  for	  a	  minute. We are going to make some ratings	  of	  our	  own anxiety. We’re going to spend a	  few minutes	  calming ourselves	  down so we can notice what it feels like when we are calm. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:Everyone takea	  few deep	  breathsto 	  start	  to 	  relax.	  I’d	  like 	  to 	  you 	  to 	  close 	  your 	  eyes 	  and 	  imagine 	  the 	  scene 	  that 	  I	  am 	  going 	  to describe. Guide the students through	  a	  brief relaxation	  script. You	  may make up	  your own	  or follow the ideas in	  the script below. [In a 	  slow, 	  relaxing 	  voice]	  Take a	  deep 	  breath 	  in…now 	  let it 	  out. 	  Take another breath	  in…and	  has you	  let it out…let your body	  relax. Good. Continue to	  take slow, deep	  breaths in, and	  each	  time you	  exhale, let your body	  relax even	  more. Imagine that all your stress	  and worries	  are	  leaving your body	  every	  time you	  exhale….Good. Feel more and	  more relaxed. Imagine 	  that 	  you 	  are 	  lying 	  on a 	  beautiful warm beach. You	  can	  feel the sun	  warming your face. As you take another deep breath in, you can smell and taste	  the	  fresh salty air.	  There’s a nice	  warm breeze	  that	  blows fresh across your face. As	  you	  take another deep	  breath	  in, you	  can	  hear in	  the	  distance	  birds chirping, and	  the ocean	  waves gently	  crashing. Continue to	  enjoy this scene	  an allow yourself to stay	  relaxed. [Allow the	  students	  to enjoy	  this for another few minutes]. Now I’m going	  to	  ask you	  to	  slowly	  open	  your eyes. Remain	  relaxed	  and	  pay	  attention	  to	  how your body	  is feeling. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  I’m 	  going 	  to 	  give 	  you 	  this 	  worksheet 	  called What’s Your	  Anxiety	  Rating	  Now.	  I’d 	  like 	  you 	  towrite down how	  nervous you feel right now on	  a	  scale from 0	  to	  100. Remember, 0 represents the	  calmest, most relaxed	  you’ve ever	  been	  and	  100	  represents	  the most anxious	  or	  panicked	  you’ve ever	  been. Distribute the “What’s Your Anxiety	  Rating	  Now?”	  Handout (see	  Appendix page 82).	  Let students	  write down	  their rating. [Group	  Leader/Counselor]: Now, think about your rating. Why	  did	  you	  make that	  rating? 	  What	  cues 	  did 	  you 	  base 	  it	  on? [With 	  Group]: Discuss the students’ responses. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Ok,	  now 	  we’re 	  going to	  try 	  something 	  different.	  This time,	  I 	  want	  you to 	  close 	  your 	  eyes 	  and 	  start 	  to 	  think 	  about a 	  situation 	  that makes you nervous. Maybe it’s	  an upcoming test or	  speech. Maybe you get invited 	  to a 	  party 	  and 	  you’re terrified 	  of 	  how to 	  act	  when 	  you 	  get	  there. [With 	  Group]: Mention ideas 	  that	  you 	  know 	  are 	  relevant	  to	  students in	  the 	  group. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Can 	  everyone 	  think 	  of a	  situation? 	  Ok,	  so 	  close 	  your eyes and think about it. Think about all the	  potential things that could go wrong or	  the bad	  things thatmighthappen. Allow your	  worriesto	  spiral	  from 	  one 	  to the 	  next. As you think about this situation, pay attention to what’s happening in 	  your 	  body. 	  How 	  does 	  your 	  heart 	  feel? 	  What is 	  your 	  breathing 	  like? 	  Are 	  you feelingwarmer	  thanbefore? Are your	  muscles tense 	  at	  all? 	  Continue to	  think about this 	  situation 	  for a 	  minute. [With 	  Group]: Allow the students to	  think about this for another few minutes [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Ok,	  now 	  open 	  your 	  eyes 	  and 	  rate 	  hownervous you	  feel right now on	  a	  scale from 0	  to	  100. Let students	  write down	  their rating. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  What happened? Did your rating change? Why? What cues did you base it on? [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  This is interesting. Nothing	  changed	  in	  this situation. We’re all still sitting in the same places we were a minute ago. Yet, our	  ratings changed. Why is that?	  What do	  you	  think	  about that?	  What does that say about the 	  power 	  of 	  our 	  thoughts? Just	  thinking about	  something bad can make us	  feel worse. Remember the connection between thoughts and feelings that we discovered	  before? Now, you’ve	  just proven/demonstrated that it’s true. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  At this point, this seems like	  bad news. Our thoughts can	  make	  us more	  anxious. However, there	  is also	  good	  news. If our	  thoughts are this	  powerful, we can	  also	  learn	  to	  use our	  thoughts to	  make ourselves less anxious.	  Now that you understand this, you are on	  your	  way	  to	  gaining	  this control. During the upcoming week, I would like you to think about your anxiety as	  you	  are in	  different situations	  and	  practice giving	  your	  anxiety	  a	  rating. We have one more topic	  before we move into	  Phase 2. In	  Phase 2, we will start to	  learn 	  skills 	  that 	  help 	  us better	  manage our	  anxiety. ReCCaP for	  Topic 3:	  Meet with the student before the next session. 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review a	  situation (e.g., that made	  them nervous) 2. Complete the Log: Have the student identify the thoughts, feelings, physiological sensations, and	  actions associated	  with	  his/her that occurred	  in 	  this 	  situation. 3. Connect to	  Treatment:Havethe rate 	  his/her	  anxietyusingtheanxiety rating 	  scale used	  in	  group. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  what	  about	  the 	  situation 	  kept	  his/her	  ratings 	  lower	  and 	  what	  about	  the 	  situation 	  madehis/herratings rise. Group	  Leader/Counselorshould	  praise 	  the 	  student	  for	  any 	  progress 	  on 	  the 	  above, reminding 	  the 	  student	  that	  learning howto	  ratethedimensionality	  oftheir anxiety	  is an	  important step	  in	  the treatment progress. Topic 4: Developing	  a	  Fear Ladder Time: 30	  minutes	  Outline • Introduce 	  the 	  concept 	  of a	  fear	  hierarchy/fearladder • Create a list of feared	  situations • Rank order the feared	  situations using anxiety ratings • Discuss what makes these situations easier or harder • Select one category of fears,	  and using the dimensions and ratings,	  create a final	  fear	  hierarchy Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  1 for	  Handouts) • Fear LadderBrainstormingExample Handout(one	  for	  each student;	  see page 83)	  • Fear LadderBrainstormingWorksheet (oneforeach	  student;	  see 	  page 84)	  • Final	  FearLadderWorksheet (one for each student;	  see 	  page 85)	  • Optional Activity (see	  box below):	  Index 	  Cards 	  (10	  to 20 for	  each student) • Pens	  for students If	  you 	  would 	  like 	  to 	  observe a 	  video 	  of a 	  counselor	  describing a 	  fear	  hierarchy, 	  link to http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHEi8wpUnic.	  When the counselor describes the Subjective Units of Distress (SUDS	  ratings), replace 	  this 	  with the	  Anxiety	  Rating	  Scale from this manual. This video	  may help	  you	  understand	  how to	  identify 	  the 	  dimensions 	  that	  make 	  anxiety 	  ratings 	  higher	  or	  lower	  for	  a 	  given situation	  and	  how to	  construct the hierarchy	  using	  these dimensions. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So, now that we know how to	  rate our	  anxiety, we’re going to create a fear ladder. 	  Each 	  step 	  on 	  the 	  ladder 	  represents a situation thatgives	  us	  anxiety.Situations	  that	  give 	  us 	  less 	  anxiety 	  are 	  on 	  the lower 	  steps 	  and 	  situations 	  that 	  produce 	  the 	  most 	  anxiety 	  are 	  on 	  the 	  higher steps. There	  are	  four activities	  involved in 	  making a 	  fear ladder:	  (1) brainstorming; (2) rating	  the 	  situations;	  (3) discovering	  what makes situations	  easieror harder;and (4)creating	  a	  finalladder.	  We 	  will 	  work 	  through 	  all 	  of theseactivities together 	  first	  with 	  anexample	  and thenusingyour ownfears. Distribute the Fear Ladder Brainstorming	  Example Handout (see page 83) Refer to	  Part 1.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Step	  1: Brainstorming: The	  first activity is to	  brainstorm by	  listing as	  many situations that make you anxious as you can. Refer to	  Part 1	  of the Fear Ladder Brainstorming	  Example Handout. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Here	  we	  have an	  example of situations for	  Mary, a	  high	  school student. You	  can	  see on	  the list many	  situations at school that make her	  feelnervous(e.g.,	  talking to 	  other 	  students 	  and 	  things 	  related to 	  taking quizzesand	  tests),	  but	  there 	  are 	  also 	  some thingsat home that causeher	  difficulty (talking to	  her 	  parents 	  about	  grades).	  	  You 	  can 	  also 	  see 	  that	  Mary listed 	  both 	  general	  categories 	  such 	  as 	  “talking 	  with 	  other 	  students” 	  and 	  very specificsituations	  suchas	  “taking 	  an 	  open 	  book 	  pop 	  quiz.” 	  	  It	  is 	  okay to	  havea	  mixture like this. We’re not going to worry about her ratings at this point. Distribute Fear Ladder Brainstorming	  Worksheet (page 84).	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now, I’d like	  you to start brainstorming the situations	  that make you anxious. During the brainstorming phase be sure to include a	  wide 	  range 	  of 	  situations. 	  	  Not 	  all	  of 	  them 	  will	  make it	  onto 	  the 	  final	  ladder,	  but	  brainstorming 	  helps 	  assure 	  that	  you 	  do 	  not	  miss 	  any 	  important	  situations. You will want to list at least eight to ten situations. Don’t worry	  about putting	  the list in	  any	  order	  right now. Be sure to	  include some situations	  that	  make you very anxious as well as others that only	  cause moderate to	  mild	  anxiety. For students having	  difficulty	  thinking	  of enough	  situations, offer situations	  that make many high	  school students anxious. • speaking in front of the	  class • taking an	  exam • asking	  someone out on	  a	  date • going	  to	  a	  new social event • driving It 	  may 	  helpful	  for some	  students	  to complete	  this	  brainstorming task	  by writing down	  these situations on	  separate note cards (see	  box below) so that they	  can move them	  around,	  sort them by categories (e.g.,	  fears related to social,	  school related, 	  or	  driving 	  situations) andadd	  othersas they	  thinkabout dimensionsand their	  ratings (steps	  2 – 4). Activity using note cards In order to create the fear hierarchy, have the students write down each feared situation on separate note cards and have them make an anxiety rating for each situation. Have the students sort	  the cards according to the type of situation. For example, Mary would have a	  stack for test	  taking, a	  stack for talking with parents, and a	  stack for talking with other students For Mary, the stack with the most	  cards would be situations regarding test	  taking. Counselors should choose the situation with the most	  cards in its stack. Next, counselors should count	  the number of cards currently in that	  stack. If the student	  has less than 6 cards, the counselor should encourage the student	  to make more levels for that	  situation. Counselors can do this by using the questions used in Step 3. Optimally, each student	  should have one situation with around 6 to 10 different	  levels of that	  situation. Next, have the student	  put	  the cards in order from lowest	  to highest	  anxiety rating. Next, the student	  should transcribe their cards onto the Final Fear Ladder Worksheet	  and make an anxiety rating for each row. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Step	  2: Rating the 	  Situations: Great! Now that we all have a	  list of situations, we need	  to	  put an	  anxiety	  rating	  next to	  them so	  that we can put them in order	  from situations that make you	  least nervous to	  those that	  make 	  you 	  the 	  most	  nervous.	  You’ll 	  see	  onyour worksheets	  thatthereis	  a	  column	  onthe 	  left	  that	  saysRating.	  Refer back to	  the Fear Ladder Brainstorming	  Example Part 1. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Let’s	  look	  back	  at Mary’s	  worksheet. You	  can	  see that	  Mary 	  finds 	  takingthe 	  State GraduationTestas	  themostanxiety	  provoking,	  so she ratedthatat a	  90.	  	  Shefeelsthat taking	  an	  open	  book	  quiz	  producesthe least 	  amount 	  of 	  anxiety,	  so 	  she 	  rated 	  that	  at	  a	  30.	  	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now, I’d like	  you to add	  ratings	  to	  the situations	  that you	  have listed	  so	  far. As	  you’re doing	  this	  feel free to	  add	  new situations	  to 	  help 	  you 	  make 	  your 	  ratings. If 	  students have	  trouble	  assigning a rating to a particular	  situation because	  they remark 	  that	  “it	  depends 	  on 	  certain 	  aspects 	  of	  the	  situation,” that’sgreat	  because	  the	  student	  is recognizing that	  some	  dimensions of	  the	  situation matter.	  Praise	  the	  student for this	  and have	  them create	  several new situations	  by	  breaking one situationinto 	  small	  situations 	  with 	  varying 	  elements 	  (e.g.,takinganopenbook	  quiz is a	  30, but taking	  a	  closed	  book quiz is a	  60). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Step	  3: Discovering	  What Makes	  Situations Easier or	  Harder: Now that we	  have	  generated these	  situations and	  rated	  them,	  we can look 	  at each of the situations	  and try	  to figure out what makes some easy	  and what make some situations hard. Let’s look at Mary’s list. We can see that how	  big	  the test is really	  affects how worried	  she gets about it. She is much	  more comfortable	  with	  open	  book	  quizzes than	  big	  standardized	  tests that can	  affect graduation. She is	  also	  more comfortable taking	  quizzes	  when	  they	  are scheduled verses	  when they	  are not scheduled (pop quizzes).	  	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  look	  at your	  lists. For	  each	  situation	  that you	  have	  listed, I would	  like	  you	  to come	  up	  with	  a	  new, but related	  situation	  that has a	  lower	  rating	  because you	  varied	  one element or	  dimension	  of the situation tomake iteasieronyou(e.g.,	  doing 	  the 	  tasks 	  alone 	  or 	  with a 	  friend,	  completing	  the	  task	  when	  there	  are	  fewpeople	  around	  or	  manypeople).	  Also see if	  you can come up with a	  new, but related	  situation	  that has a	  higher	  rating	  because you	  varied	  one element to	  that makes you	  more anxious. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  for	  example, if	  you	  were afraid	  of	  driving	  at night and	  you	  rated	  that a	  60. You	  might lower	  the rating	  to	  40	  or	  50	  if	  you	  were with	  a	  friend	  or	  only	  had	  to	  drive a	  short distance on	  a	  familiar	  road. But you	  might raise the rating	  to	  70	  or	  80	  if	  you	  were driving	  alone or	  were driving	  on	  a	  new road	  where you’ve never	  been	  before. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  think	  about what dimensions or	  elements result in 	  a change in 	  anxiety 	  ratings. Do you see any patterns that make situations easier or harder?	  Everyone	  will likely come	  up with different answers and that’s okay. I’m going	  to	  go	  around	  the room and	  see what you	  all have come up	  with. Give the students some time to	  make these changes. Work with each student on	  identifying 	  these 	  elements. Here are some examples of common elements or dimension: • You	  are alone verses with	  a	  friend • The situation	  is familiar verses unfamiliar • There are many	  people present verses few people present • It is	  day 	  time 	  or	  night 	  time • The situation is	  short verses	  longer in duration • Thepersonin 	  the 	  situation 	  with 	  them is a 	  man 	  or	  woman • The person	  is of higher status than	  you	  (e.g., teacher or parent vs. peer) • The situation	  is less or more predictable • There are great or minor consequences • The	  situation is	  less	  or more	  avoidable	  (e.g., voluntary or required) It	  may 	  be 	  difficult 	  for	  students 	  to 	  identify 	  these 	  dimensions. 	  	  Counselors 	  should 	  ask students	  what makes	  the	  situations	  worse/more	  scary	  or better/less	  scary. The	  common elements	  listed	  above are good	  starting	  points for counselors to	  have their	  students think	  about.	  For	  example, if	  a student	  is worried about	  taking tests, the	  counselor	  may want	  to ask	  if	  the	  student	  becomes more	  anxious is the	  test	  is worth a lot of points or just a few points	  (e.g., great	  or minor consequences).	  Then the	  counselor	  could ask	  if	  there	  is a particular	  subject	  that	  makes tests scarier	  and which subjects are less scary. The counselor could	  also	  ask about types of tests (e.g., multiple	  choice, true	  or	  false)	  that	  are	  more	  or	  less	  scary. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Why is it important that we identify these dimensions?	  Because by	  understanding	  them you	  will be better	  able to	  predict how much	  anxiety	  you	  will experience in	  new situations that may	  be similar	  to	  those 	  you 	  listed.	  	  Later,	  when 	  we 	  work 	  together 	  onfacing our	  fears(exposure activities),	  it	  is 	  helpful	  to	  be 	  able to	  make 	  these 	  predictions 	  about	  situations.	  	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Step	  4: Refining and Finalizing Your	  Hierarchies: Now that	  we 	  have 	  examined 	  several 	  situations,	  as 	  well 	  as 	  several 	  dimensions	  within a	  given	  situation,we	  will create	  yourfinalfear	  ladderthat	  we 	  will 	  be 	  using during	  Phase 3	  of the program. We want our final fear ladder to 	  have a	  few situations	  that have lower	  anxiety	  ratings, a	  few situations	  that have moderate anxiety	  ratings	  and	  a	  fewsituations	  thathavehigh	  anxiety	  ratings.	  See 	  how 	  in Part 2 of the	  example	  sheet, Mary has focused on her fear of tests and has finalizedher	  fear	  laddersothatshe has	  a	  situationfor	  eachrating. So,	  let’s think about	  the 	  fear 	  category	  that is	  mostimportant 	  to 	  you or	  thathasthemost situations	  in it and	  create	  a	  final ladder so that you have at least one situation for	  each rating. Distribute the Final Fear Ladder Worksheet (see page 85).	  Work with each student to finalize	  their	  ladder. If 	  students 	  have 	  multiple 	  fears 	  and 	  want 	  to 	  create 	  more 	  than 	  one ladder	  that	  is acceptable (give them a	  second	  worksheet). Alternatively, students could have	  multiple categories on one ladder	  if	  there 	  are 	  not	  enough 	  dimensions 	  within a given	  category	  for that student. Put the	  finalladders in 	  the 	  student	  folders. Before moving	  onto	  Phase 2, have students complete the End	  of Phase 1	  Assessment (see	  page	  86).	  If	  students	  do not	  pass 80% of the questions, review these	  concepts with them and have	  them retake	  the	  assessment	  before	  moving onto	  Phase 2. PHASE 2: SKILLS	  ACQUISITION After completing	  Phase 1,	  the students should have a basic knowledge about anxiety and understand the	  general ideas	  involved in cognitive	  behavioral theory	  and how it may apply to their anxiety.	  Specifically, they	  should understand the relationship 	  between 	  situations, 	  thoughts, feelings, physiological sensations and behaviorsandhow thesecan	  worktogetherto	  increase 	  or	  decrease 	  anxiety. During the second phase, students	  learn several skills	  to help them better manage	  their	  anxiety.	  There are 4 skills/topics in 	  this 	  phase • Relaxation	  techniques • Identifying automatic thoughts	  and thinking	  errors • Challenging automatic thoughts and replacing	  them with rationale	  responses • Self-..evaluation and reward Skillsdevelopmentwill occurthrough	  discussion,modeling 	  of	  skills 	  by	  the counselor,	  engagement in activities and through role	  plays. After students	  can demonstrate the application	  of these skills	  in mildly anxiety-..provoking situations, they	  move to Phase 3. Important 	  Notes:	  1. During this phase, students learn	  best through	  models. Thus, the group leader/counselor should model each skill, briefly and clearly describing each part of the skill. Then, as	  students	  start to develop the	  skill, they	  can serve	  as	  models	  for	  each other. 2. When group leaders/counselors	  are	  modeling	  skills	  for students, it is	  important to model	  using a “coping model” rather	  than a “mastery	  model.” This means	  that counselors	  should model the skill with some	  hesitancy	  and doubt that the	  skills	  will work, as well as some optimism	  for giving the skill a try. In a 	  coping 	  models, the group leader/counselor should make	  the	  skill look	  difficult to apply	  rather than easy	  to apply. For example 	  the group leader/counselor may think out loud for the students	  “Oh, no; the	  teacher	  said that	  our	  projects are	  due	  by the	  end of	  the	  week.	  That	  totally spiked my anxiety.	  I’m probably at	  a 50 or	  60.	  I know I’m 	  supposed 	  to 	  try 	  deep 	  breathing, 	  but 	  I’m 	  worried 	  that	  others 	  will	  see 	  me do	  it and	  laugh. Oh, I remember someone else saying	  that they	  go	  to	  the bathroom to	  do	  it. I’ll ask the teacher to	  go	  and	  give it a	  try. At least that would be better than having a panic attack right here.” Then	  demonstrate deep	  breathing techniques. 2.Frequentpraise	  and encouragementof each studentis 	  important.	  Group leaders/counselors are	  encouraged to praise	  effort rather than accomplishments, particularly when	  learning new skills so	  that students feel success and	  motivation to continue practicing the skill. Objectives: • Students will demonstrate relaxation	  skills (i.e., deep	  breathing and/or muscle relaxation) • Students will identify automatic thoughts and	  thinking errors. • Students will challenge automatic thoughts and replace	  them with a	  more	  rational	  response • Student will demonstrate self-..evaluation and self-..reward 	  skills These objectives can	  be assessed	  in	  group	  sessions and	  during ReCCaP meetings. To	  determine if each student is	  ready	  to move	  to Phase	  3,	  Counselors/Group facilitators will	  have students	  complete	  the	  End of Phase	  2	  Assessment (see	  page	  100). Topic 1: Relaxation Techniques Time: 30	  minutes	  Outline • Introduce 	  Phase 2 	  as a 	  phase 	  focused 	  on a 	  set 	  of 	  skills 	  to 	  reduce 	  anxiety • Describe the rationale and benefits of deep	  breathing • Model deep breathing • Allowthestudentsto practice 	  deep 	  breathing 	  for	  5-..10	  minutes • Describe the rationale and	  benefits of muscle relaxation • Model muscle relaxation • Allowthestudentsto practice 	  muscle 	  relaxation 	  for	  5-..10	  minutes Materials Needed • Space	  for students	  to lie	  down recline Because it’s helpful to	  have a	  place to	  lie down, consider conducting	  this meeting	  in a	  room with	  more space (e.g., the	  gym or	  on the	  theater	  stage,	  outside). [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Up until now, we’ve	  been learning about anxiety, how our	  thoughts, feelings, and	  behaviors are connected, and	  how to	  rate our	  anxiety.Wealso	  have our	  own	  fear	  ladders.	  Because 	  thoughts 	  and 	  feelings determine how we act, in	  this second	  phase, we are going to 	  learn 	  how to 	  gain more control over our thoughts and feelings. The strategies we learn will help to reduce our	  anxiety, cope with	  our	  anxiety, and	  succeed	  in	  the activities	  that we’re currently afraid of or are avoiding. It’s 	  important 	  to 	  understand 	  that no	  one skill is likely	  to	  address all of your	  challenges; however	  the combination	  of these 	  skills 	  is 	  very 	  helpful 	  in 	  addressing 	  your 	  challenges.	  So 	  you 	  may 	  want	  to think 	  about	  building a	  toolkit	  or 	  toolbox.	  We’re 	  going to 	  learn 	  several 	  tools to put in	  your	  box	  and	  then	  in	  each	  situation, you	  can	  decide which	  ones you’re going	  to	  use for	  that situation. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  first skill we’re going to learn is relaxation. You	  could	  seek student’s initial reactions to	  this. They	  may	  not buy	  into it either because they	  say	  they’ve tried	  it and	  it doesn’t work, or because they	  think it sounds	  silly. If this	  is	  the	  case, you can address	  this	  by	  asking them to try	  the	  techniques as an experiment	  and report	  back	  on their	  experiences. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Sometimes	  students	  do	  not believe this will help. However, we	  have	  found that once	  students better understand how these 	  skills address	  anxiety	  and	  how to 	  do 	  the 	  skill 	  correctly,	  that	  the 	  skills 	  do 	  seem to 	  help.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  the relaxation	  skills	  we’re going	  to	  talk	  about are (1)	  deep	  breathing	  and	  (2)	  muscle relaxation. Does anyone know why these are so important and helpful? [With 	  Group]: Let students	  offer ideas. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Remember how we	  learned that our	  bodies have a	  naturalflightor	  flight system,	  the 	  ACTIVATION 	  SYSTEM?	  Does anyone	  remember	  what the activation	  system is	  called? [With 	  Group]: Let students	  answer. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Yes, the Sympathetic	  Nervous	  System. Does	  anyone remember	  what the calming	  system is	  called? [With 	  Group]: Let students	  answer. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Yes, the Parasympathetic Nervous	  System. The reason	  that these two	  relaxation	  skills	  are so	  important is that they	  activate your	  calming	  system. They	  trigger	  the parasympathetic system. So	  they	  tell your	  body	  “There’s no	  reason	  to	  be alarmed, so	  it’s time to	  cool down”. If	  you 	  previously 	  used 	  butcher	  paper	  of 	  individual	  student 	  drawings 	  to 	  depict 	  the activation	  and	  calming	  system (See Phase 1), you	  could	  pull these out now to	  remind 	  the 	  students 	  of	  how 	  this 	  skills 	  addresses 	  some 	  of	  the 	  components 	  of	  anxiety. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Relaxation is a technique or	  exercise designed	  to	  createphysiologicalcalming.	  The two 	  relaxation 	  techniques thatwe’re going	  to	  use are deep breathing and muscle	  relaxation. Rationale	  and Benefits of Deep Breathing [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  reason	  we	  focus on	  deep	  breathing	  is that slow, deep	  breathing	  serves	  to activate your	  CALMING SYSTEM. It tells	  the body	  to turn 	  off 	  all 	  those 	  unpleasant	  physiological 	  symptoms. In	  addition,	  deep 	  breathing • Can be	  used in class without anyone	  noticing • Can be	  used during stressful moments such as taking an exam or while trying to 	  relax 	  at	  home • Can enhance	  other relaxation techniques or be	  used on its own • Provides relief from troubling sensations, feelings	  and thoughts • Canbe	  used with a pleasant,	  calming 	  mental	  image 	  (e.g.,	  the 	  beach,	  park,	  forest, playing with a	  favorite 	  pet) [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  First, I	  will	  describe 	  how 	  to 	  do 	  deep 	  breaking 	  and show you how to do it. Then, you	  will practice it. After	  5	  minutes, we’ll take a	  break. You	  can	  ask	  questions and	  we can	  discuss how each	  of you	  felt. Then	  we’ll practice it 	  again. 	  The 	  only 	  way 	  to 	  get 	  good 	  at 	  this 	  and 	  feel	  comfortable doing	  it, is to	  practice. Deep Breathing Steps [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Follow 	  these 	  steps 	  with 	  me 1. Liedownon	  your	  back,	  bend 	  your 	  knees,	  and 	  move 	  your 	  feet	  about	  eight	  inches 	  apart. 	  Make 	  sure 	  that 	  your 	  spine is	  straight. (Or,	  if 	  they 	  are 	  not	  able to	  lie down-..-..sit comfortably	  with your	  legs	  uncrossed and arms	  down	  at your	  sides or	  in	  your	  lap.) 2. Place	  one	  hand on your abdomen and one hand on your chest 3. Inhale 	  slowly 	  and 	  deeply 	  through 	  your 	  nose 	  into 	  your 	  abdomen 	  to 	  push up	  your	  hand	  as much	  as feels comfortable. Your	  chest should	  move only	  a	  little and	  only	  with	  your	  abdomen. 4. When you feel comfortable with step 3, smile slightly	  and	  inhale through	  your	  nose and	  exhale through	  your	  mouth, making	  a	  quiet, relaxing, whooshing sound like the wind as you blow	  gently out. Your mouth, tongue,	  and 	  jaw 	  will 	  be 	  relaxed.	  Take 	  long 	  and 	  slow 	  deep 	  breaths 	  that	  raise and	  lower	  your	  abdomen.	  5. Focus	  on	  the sound	  and	  feeling	  of	  breathing	  as	  you	  become more and	  more relaxed. 6. Continue	  breathing for	  about 5 minutes. 7. When you become at ease with breathing into your abdomen, practice it any	  time during	  the day	  when	  you	  feel like it or	  when	  you	  feel yourself	  getting	  tense. You	  can	  practice it sitting	  down	  or	  standing	  still. You	  may	  choose to	  share the following	  additional tips with	  the students Extra	  Deep	  Breathing	  Tips • Focus	  just on	  breathing	  and	  try	  to	  clear	  your	  mind	  of	  other	  thoughts	  or	  feelings • Breathe from the stomach	  rather	  than	  from the chest • Breathe in	  slowly	  through	  the nose, and	  out through	  the mouth • Children should breathe	  in to the	  count of 5, and out to the	  count of 5 • “Breathe in, two, three, four, five, and	  out, two, three, four, five”	  (at a	  rate of	  about one count per	  second	  or	  two) • Adolescents should breathe	  in and out to the	  count of 8 • If 	  uncomfortable, have them take 3	  normal breaths	  in	  between	  deep	  breaths • Have	  them imagine	  a balloon filling with air, then totally emptying Rationale	  for Muscle Relaxation [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Good. Now we’re going to practice another relaxation	  strategy, called muscle relaxation. Most people do not realize which of their	  muscles are chronically	  tense. Alternating	  between	  states of muscle tension 	  and 	  relaxation 	  helps the 	  body 	  tell 	  the 	  difference between	  the two	  states	  and helps	  relax muscles	  that are tense. A	  key goal is to notice	  the difference between	  the feelings of tension	  and	  relaxation. Muscle Relaxation Steps [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  get in	  a	  relaxed	  position	  again. Try	  to	  follow my	  instructions 	  while 	  staying in 	  this 	  relaxed 	  state. 1. Lie on	  your	  back	  or	  get in a 	  comfortable 	  position. 	  	  Allow 	  your 	  arms 	  to rest at your	  sides.	  2. Clench your left hand into fist and hold it tightly for 15 seconds. As you do this 	  relax 	  the 	  rest	  of 	  your 	  body. 3. Then	  let your hand	  relax. Feel the	  looseness in	  your hand, and	  notice	  the	  difference from the 	  tension.	  	  Always 	  notice 	  as 	  you 	  relax 	  that	  this 	  is 	  the opposite of tension. Relax	  and	  feel the difference. [With 	  Group]: 4. Repeat this procedure two more	  times with the left hand 5. Repeatthisprocedurethreetimeswith	  theright	  hand 6. Have the students tense	  and relax the	  following parts of	  the	  body	  in	  the order below. Hold each part tensed for 15 seconds and then relax the body for	  30 seconds.	  Repeat	  this process three	  times	  before	  going on to the	  next	  part:	  a. Face (squeeze	  lips	  toward your	  nose	  and furrow your	  brow) b. Shoulders (bring chin to your	  chest, and shoulders	  toward your	  ears) c. Stomach d. Legs e. Feet	  and toes (curl	  toes	  underneath your	  feet).	  7. Finish	  the exercise by	  shaking	  your	  hands	  and	  imagining	  any	  remaining	  tension 	  flowing 	  out	  of 	  your 	  fingertips.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Good job. Just	  like any	  skill, you need to practice this 	  in 	  order to	  get	  good 	  at	  it	  or 	  for 	  it	  to	  help 	  you 	  when 	  you 	  are	  stressed. Thus, between	  now and	  the next meeting, I would	  like each	  of you	  to	  practice deep	  breathing	  and	  muscle relaxation	  two	  times. You	  can	  report back	  to	  the group	  what it was like for you and teach others how	  you got it to work for you. In addition,I	  will	  try 	  to 	  see 	  each 	  one 	  of 	  you 	  between 	  now 	  and 	  the 	  next 	  meeting 	  for a	  ReCCaP. At this time	  you can tell me	  about when you used the	  skill and how it went. ReCCaP for Topic	  1:	  Meet with the student before the next session. 1. Review:Have	  the	  student pick and	  reviewsituation in 	  which 	  they	  used deep	  breathing or muscle relaxation 2. Complete the Log: (Use Phase 1 ReCCaP Log) Have the student identify the thoughts, feelings, physiological	  sensations, and actions associated with his/her that occurred	  in	  this situation. 3. Connect to	  Treatment: Have the student describe his/her experience in	  implementing 	  the 	  skill	  and 	  the 	  impact	  that	  it	  had 	  on 	  their	  anxiety. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describehowhe/shewillcontinueto	  usethisskill whenanxious. Whatwill	  he/she 	  do 	  again 	  or	  change? Group	  Leader/Counselorshould	  praise 	  the 	  student	  for	  any 	  progress 	  on 	  the 	  above, reminding 	  the 	  student	  that	  practicemakestheskillworkbetter during	  stressful	  situations. Topic 2: Identifying	  Automatic	  Thoughts and	  Thinking	  Errors Time: 15-..20 minutes with one activity Outline • Describe an	  automatic thought • Discuss common thinking	  errors	  • Complete the Automatic Thoughts Handout Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  1) • Thinking ErrorsHandout (oneforeach	  student;	  see 	  page 	  88) • Automatic Thoughts and Thinking	  Errors	  Handout (one	  for	  each student;	  see	  pages 89-..92) [With 	  Group]: Start the	  group	  session	  by	  having students	  discuss	  their experiences	  with deep breathing and muscle relaxation. Help them help	  each	  other problem solve	  any	  challenges	  that they	  are	  having in using the	  skills. Instruct them to continue	  practicing these	  skills	  each week. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Sometimes	  we have negative thoughts	  that just pop	  into 	  our heads. We’re going	  to	  call these automatic	  thoughts because they	  usually	  pop	  up	  automatically.	  	  Everyone 	  has 	  them,	  but	  sometimes 	  these thoughts 	  can 	  really 	  bother 	  us 	  and 	  create 	  more 	  anxious 	  feelings.	  	  An 	  automatic thought	  can 	  be a	  negative,	  unhelpfulor	  irrational(not	  in	  line 	  with 	  reality)	  thought	  about	  us,	  the 	  world,	  or 	  the 	  future.	  	  For 	  example 	  an 	  automatic	  thought aboutus	  mightbe “Iknow I’ll mess up.” 	  An 	  automatic 	  thought	  about	  the 	  world might be “Nothing ever goes right.” Finally, an automatic thought about the future might be “things	  will never	  get better.”	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  There	  are	  different types of automatic	  thoughts. Our thoughts can sometimes get the better of us and almost take over our feelings	  and our	  behaviors. We call these thinking 	  errors.	  There	  are	  several thinking 	  errors 	  that	  are 	  common 	  inautomatic	  thoughts. Distribute Thinking	  Errors Handout (see	  page	  88).	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Here	  is a list of some	  common themes that automatic	  thoughts	  can	  fall under. [With 	  Group]: Describe each error and have the students come of with examples that	  fit	  that	  error.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  The	  good	  news is that as people	  learn	  to	  change	  their 	  automatic 	  thoughts,	  theyfeellessanxious. Butbecausethey’re 	  automatic and	  we have	  them without really noticing, these 	  thoughts 	  can 	  be 	  hard to identify. Let’s practice	  identifying these	  thoughts and then we	  can work on how to 	  change 	  these 	  thoughts. Distribute the Automatic Thought and	  Thinking	  Errors	  Handout	  (see	  pages 89-..92).	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Onthe 	  handout	  titled Automatic Thought and	  Thinking	  Errors,	  you’ll see several different people in	  different situations. After each, we’re	  going to identify possible	  automatic	  thoughts that these	  people	  are	  having	  and	  see ifwecan	  labelthethinking	  errorsthat	  are associated	  with	  those thoughts.	  [With 	  Group]:	  You	  can	  work through	  this as a	  group, or let the students complete	  this individually and	  return	  for a	  group	  discussion. Consider doing	  half of the worksheet in one session and completing the other half in another session so that students	  get distributed practice	  with this	  skill. With each situation,	  have the group	  consider how this thinking	  error will affect that persons feelings and	  next actions,	  highlighting how negative thinking errors often make us feel worse and result	  in	  us 	  avoiding 	  people 	  or	  a	  potentially	  fun	  situation.	  Alsomentionthat	  in many cases we came	  up with very	  different answers	  and that’s	  okay	  because	  everyone	  has	  different	  thoughts	  in different	  situations. Most students need more repetition with the task. Thus, complete the additional activity	  in	  the box below as you	  have time. Additional Activity for Identifying Automatic Thoughts and Thinking Errors Nick’s Story: Working through an example story of someone with automatic thoughts and linking those to emotions. Let’s look	  at an example of the automatic thoughts that a student reported 	  having	  in 	  a	  situation 	  that	  made	  himprettyanxious. Nick	  wantedtorunforclass president. Each	  candidate was	  required	  to	  give a	  speech	  to	  the entire school	  during an	  assembly. Nick	  was terrified of giving the speech in front of the whole school. During the speech, Nick	  was to describe how he would help the student body and why people should vote for him. About a week	  before he was scheduled to speak, Nick	  started to get very nervous. Nick	  knew that if he was feeling anxious, he must be having some automatic thoughts. He wrote down several things he was thinking when feeling anxious. He thought “They will think	  I’m a	  complete 	  idiot”	  (mind reading), “I 	  shouldn’t	  be getting	  this nervous” (should	  statements),	  “I’ll 	  get	  up 	  there	  andpass	  out	  (fortune telling),	  and	  “I	  don’t	  have anything	  to	  say”	  (black and white thinking).” Write these thoughts (but	  not	  the thinking errors) on the board or provide them	  in a handout. Now, last time we talked about thinking errors.	  	  Let’s	  go through	  each	  ofthese 	  thoughtsandseeifitmatchesanyofthethinkingerrors 	  we	  discussed.	  	  Have students work through all the thoughts and debate which thinking trap they match. Now	  let’s talk	  about each thought and what kind of emotions those thoughts might cause. Have the students discuss the kinds of emotions that	  might	  be evoked by those thoughts. Alright, now if Nick	  is having all these automatic thoughts, how do you think	  he might act or behave? What might Nick	  do now? Begin	  Using	  the Phase	  2	  ReCCaP	  Log (see	  Appendix page	  93) ReCCaP for	  Topic 2:	  Meet with the student before the next session. 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review situation that made	  them nervous 2. Complete the Log: (Only	  complete	  the	  top row of	  boxes	  this	  week).	  Have the student	  identify the automatic thoughts	  that they had and have	  them identify	  the 	  thinking 	  error associated with those thoughts (also complete	  the feelings, anxiety	  ratings, and behavior boxes	  on the	  top row). 3. Connect to	  Treatment: Have the student identify the automatic thoughts that	  they	  had and then classify	  them according to the common thinking errors. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  how 	  he/shewillidentify	  automatic thoughts in the future. Group	  Leader/Counselorshould	  praise 	  the 	  student	  for	  any 	  progress 	  on 	  the 	  above, reminding them, that	  with practice, this skills will	  help cope	  with anxiety. Topic	  3: Challenging	  Automatic	  Thoughts and	  Thinking	  Errors Time: 15-..20	  minutes	  with one	  activity Outline • Introduce 	  the 	  concept 	  of 	  challenging our thinking • Identify labels that	  the group can use for	  positive self-..statements	  and negative self-..statements • Complete one or more activities that help	  develop	  the skill of challenging automatic thoughts	  and producing	  more helpful responses Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  2) • Challenging Your Automatic Thoughts Handout (one	  for	  each student,	  see page 94) • Optional Handouts: o Talking Back to	  Fear Handout (page	  95) o “What If” Thinking Handout (page	  96) o Coping Response Handout (page	  97) o Experimenting to	  Test Your Thoughts Handout (page	  98) [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We’ve been working on identify 	  our 	  automatic thoughts 	  and 	  putting them 	  into 	  categories 	  or 	  thinking errors.	  We can refer to this 	  as 	  self-..talk.	  Self-..talk 	  is what we say to ourselves in a given situation. We’ve discussed	  how our	  automatic	  thoughts are often	  negative and can lead 	  us 	  to feeling bad about ourselves	  or	  a	  situation and often lead us	  to avoiding situations	  that could be fun. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  So	  now,	  wearegoing	  to	  learn	  howto	  changethose negative statements that are harmful into	  more positive statements that are helpful. [With 	  Group]:	  Askthegroup	  howthey	  wantto refer	  to	  this,	  some examplesare helping	  thoughts and	  hurting	  thoughts;	  or thinking	  errors and	  rationale responses. But the student may	  want to	  come up	  with	  more creative names that are meaningful to them. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We are going to do this by challenging our	  negative thoughts. We are going to have to examine each thought that we	  have	  and find out if it’s accurate or	  helpful, and	  if not, then	  we are going	  to	  replace this negative thought (hurting thought/thinking error) with a more positive thought (helping thought/rationale response). There	  are	  many ways to	  go	  about challenging	  our	  thoughts. We are going to do several activities so that you can get the hang	  of this. There will be some strategies that you	  like and	  others that you	  don’t. Once you’ve sampled	  several, and	  have come up	  with	  the ones	  that work for you, then	  you	  can	  start using	  these strategies	  in	  our	  exposure tasks	  and	  in	  real situations. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We will start with this first activity. [With 	  Group]:	  Distribute the Challenging	  Your Automatic Thoughts Handout to each student	  and have	  students	  complete	  the	  worksheet	  either as	  a group or individually 	  with 	  group 	  discussion to 	  follow.	  Select additional activities from the	  box below and	  continue working	  through	  them until the students have developed	  this skill. Activities for repetition Talking Back	  to Fear Worksheet. This is a	  worksheet	  that also guides students in developing a	  mantra	  or coping statement	  which they can say to themselves when they are feeling anxious or nervous. Once the students have completed the worksheet, provide them with index cards to write their talking back thoughts on. Encourage the students to keep these index cards somewhere they can get	  to them easily (e.g., binder, book bag, pocket, wallet) and tell them to read over these cards when they are feeling anxious. “What 	  if” Thinking Worksheet.	  Often our worries begin with “What	  if.” For example, what	  if I	  fail this test? This worksheet	  will help students learn how to challenge their what	  if thinking and to produce a	  rational response.	  	  Rational Response Handout. This is a	  worksheet	  that	  requires students to list	  an automatic thought	  which comes from their “anxious self” and then respond to that	  thought	  with a	  statement	  from the student’s “coping self.” This worksheet	  should look like a	  dialogue between the two parts of ourselves. Experimenting to	  Test	  Your Thoughts	  Handout. At	  the beginning of each day, students record how worried they are that	  bad things will happen. At	  the end of the day, they record any bad things that	  actually happened during that	  day and rate how bad the day actually was. Encourage the student	  to notice that	  many times the worry rating is higher than the actual rating, and that	  many bad things do not	  happen. ReCCaP for	  Topic 3:	  Meet with the student before the next	  session. 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review situation that made	  them nervous 2.	  Complete the Log: (Complete	  the	  top and bottom rows	  of	  boxes	  this	  week). Have the student identify the automatic thoughts that they had	  and	  have them identify the thinking error	  associated with those thoughts (also complete	  the	  feelings, anxiety	  ratings, and behavior boxes	  on the	  top row). Then	  have the student challenge the thought and	  provide a	  more rational response.	  Discuss 	  the 	  impact	  of	  this 	  new 	  thought	  onfeelings and behaviors. 3. Connect to	  Treatment: Have the student identify the automatic thoughts that	  they	  had and then provide disputes and rational	  responses to challenge	  or combat	  those	  automatic	  thought. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  how 	  he/shecan use	  this	  rationale	  response in 	  the 	  future. Group	  Leader/Counselorshould	  praise 	  the 	  student	  for	  any 	  progress 	  on 	  the 	  above, reminding them, that	  with practice, these	  skills will	  help cope	  with anxiety. Topic	  4: Self-..Evaluation and	  Self-..Reward Time: 15	  minutes Outline • Define rewards and	  discuss	  why	  self-..reward is 	  important • Define and	  describe self-..evaluation • Emphasizethatself-..reward 	  should 	  happen 	  following 	  good 	  effort	  not	  just	  good outcomes Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  2) • My Rewards List Handout (see	  page	  99) [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Everyone has	  been	  working	  very	  hard	  in	  learning	  the 	  skills 	  of 	  relaxation,	  identifying 	  automatic 	  thoughts, and	  changing	  negative self-..talk into 	  positive 	  self-..talk.	  In	  the 	  next 	  phase 	  of 	  our 	  work,	  you’re	  goingto learn 	  how 	  to 	  start 	  using 	  all	  of 	  these 	  tools 	  together in 	  real	  life 	  situations. Because you	  are working	  so	  hard	  on	  this, it is important to	  reward	  yourself for	  hard	  work	  or	  difficult tasks. What do	  I mean	  when	  I say	  reward	  yourself?	  [With 	  Group]:	  Let students	  respond. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Why is it important to reward yourself when you’ve worked hard? [With 	  Group]:	  Let students	  respond. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Yes, a	  reward	  is	  something	  you	  given	  when	  you	  are pleased	  with the work that is done. It helps people take pride in what they’ve done and	  motivates them to	  do	  it again. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  For	  example, if	  a	  group	  of	  student complete all of	  their 	  in 	  class 	  work,	  the 	  teacher 	  may 	  reward 	  them 	  by 	  giving 	  that	  group	  free time on	  the computer. [With 	  Group]:	  Describe that in the beginning, teachers may reward students for doing	  part of the work right, and	  then	  gradually	  require them to	  do	  all of the work in	  order	  to	  get	  the 	  reward.	  Ask	  students 	  why 	  the 	  teacher	  mightdo	  this. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  In 	  order 	  to 	  determine if	  you 	  deserve a	  reward,	  you have to	  decide if you	  are pleased	  or	  satisfied	  with	  what you’ve done. This is called	  a	  self-..evaluation. [With 	  Group]:	  Describe that self-..evaluation and	  self-..reward 	  happen 	  frequently, although	  people might not know they	  are doing	  it. See if the group	  can	  come up	  with some examples of this. Some	  examples: • After completing	  homework, a	  student plays video	  games at home • A	  student who	  plays soccer,	  scores a	  goal to	  help	  his team win. He and	  his teammate go	  out for ice cream afterward	  to	  celebrate the win. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now, do you	  think 	  we 	  should 	  reward 	  ourselves 	  only when we show	  perfect performance? [With 	  Group]:	  Let students	  respond. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  No, why not? [With 	  Group]:	  Point out that expecting perfect	  performance	  (Getting an “A” on every assignment, scoring a goal every game)	  is	  unrealistic.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:In 	  fact,	  when 	  something is 	  very 	  difficult 	  or 	  new to us, it’s important to	  reward	  ourselves for	  trying	  and/or	  for	  doing	  just slightly	  better	  than	  the time before. So	  I want youto 	  start	  practicing 	  rewarding yourself	  for	  trying to 	  implement	  these 	  skills.	  Each 	  week,	  when 	  we 	  meet,	  I’ll 	  ask 	  you to mention one of the skills that you	  tried	  and	  how you	  rewarded	  yourself for	  trying. [With 	  Group]:	  One by one, describe each sample situation below. After you read the	  situation, ask	  the	  students to discuss how they would evaluate their	  behavior	  in	  that	  situation 	  and 	  whether	  or	  not	  they 	  would 	  reward 	  themselves 	  for	  this behavior. Discuss differences in	  student responses. Add	  other examples. Situation  Self-..Evaluation  Reward or Not?  The student enters a	  situation	  on	  his fear hierarchy that is rated	  as a 30 (mild	  anxiety) and copes	  well with that situation  Positive/Higher Rating  Reward  The student enters a	  situation	  on	  his fear hierarchy that is rated	  as an	  80 (high	  anxiety). The	  situation is	  difficult for him, and he	  did not use	  his	  coping	  skills	   Negative/Lower Rating  No	  reward  The student enters a	  situation	  on	  his fear hierarchy that is 	  rated 	  as 	  an 	  80 	  (trying 	  out	  for	  a play).	  The situation is difficult	  for	  him, and	  he did	  remember to	  use his coping	  skills (e.g., deep	  breathing),	  but he was not selected to be in the play.  Positive/Higher Rating  Reward  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Because you’re going	  to	  start doing	  some hard	  work to face your anxiety, we need to come up with a list of rewards that you can	  give	  to	  yourself. Our	  task	  today (or	  in	  the	  upcoming	  week) is to	  create	  a	  rewards	  list. How would	  you	  like to	  reward	  yourself	  for	  working	  hard? [With 	  Group]:	  Distribute My Reward List Handouts (see	  page	  99)	  and	  help students	  identify	  small rewards they	  can	  provide to	  themselves. Some	  examples: earning crazy band bracelets, an hour of	  video games, an hour on facebook, a	  walk outside. ReCCaP for	  Topic 4:	  Meet with the student before the next session. 1. Review: Have	  the	  student pick	  and review situation in which he/she	  used successfully	  challenged his/her automatic	  thoughts. 2. Complete the Log: Complete the top	  and	  bottom rows of boxes this week to reflect	  what	  happened in the above situation.	  3. Connect to	  Treatment: Have the student discuss his/her self-..evaluation for	  theabovesituation as well	  asher	  self-..reward.	  If	  they 	  forgot	  to	  self.reward, create a plan	  for them to	  do	  so	  in	  the next 24 hours. 4. Plan: 	  Have 	  the 	  student	  describe 	  how 	  he/she 	  will	  reward 	  herself	  for	  using the skill	  and how he/she plans to use it	  again in the future? PHASE 3: SKILLS	  PRACTICE After completing Phase 2, the students	  should be	  able	  to demonstrate	  the	  skills	  of relaxation, 	  identifying 	  and 	  modifying 	  negative 	  self-..talk, and self-..evaluation and reward.	  Once 	  students 	  can 	  demonstrate 	  these 	  skillseitherin group orin ReCCap situations, they	  move to Phase 3. The key to	  Phase	  3 is to facilitate therapeutic	  exposure to feared situations. Exposure means facing the situations that make you	  nervous. During the third	  phase, students will apply and	  practice the newly learned	  skills in	  increasingly anxiety-..provoking situations. The practicing of new skills takes place through imagined 	  exposures, role 	  plays,	  and in-..vivo exposure	  tasks	  and continues	  until the	  student can apply	  the	  skills	  in highly	  anxiety-..provoking situations,	  has reduced avoidance	  of such situations,	  and/or has improved	  functioning in	  previously.impaired 	  domains.	  Important 	  Notes:	  1. Because	  exposure	  is	  so challenging	  to students, it is	  important that they understand	  the rationale for	  it	  and that	  they	  know that	  the process will	  not	  move at a	  pace	  that is	  faster than	  they can	  handle. Although	  you	  will gently push	  them to continually	  take on more challenging situations, they	  need to feel	  safe and know that, ultimately, they	  can control	  the rate of	  the process.	  This is described	  in	  the ORIENTATION TO PHASE 3 below. 2. Although 	  Phase 1 	  and 	  Phase 	  2 provide a necessary and	  critical foundation	  to	  success	  with CBT treatment for anxiety, they	  are	  not sufficient to produce lasting changein 	  student	  behavior.	  Exposureis a	  necessaryelementto	  treatment success. Thus,groupleaders/counselors	  must	  not lose 	  interest	  or	  allow 	  students to lose interest	  in the process before completing Phase	  3. 3. Most group leaders/counselors	  do too few exposures.	  The benefits of	  exposure (student	  success, mastery, and confidence)	  are	  only	  achieved through repetition. Thus, just when	  you	  think you	  have done enough	  exposure tasks, do	  one or two	  more to ensure mastery and maintenance of the skills. Objectives: • Students will understand	  the process and	  rationale for exposure tasks • Students will demonstrate the processes	  of planning for	  an exposure	  task and reviewing	  the	  task after completion • Students will successfully complete multiple exposure tasks for each	  situation on their hierarchy Topic 1: Orientation	  to	  Exposure Tasks ALL	  STUDENTS	  MUST	  PARTICIPATE	  IN	  THIS	  ORIENTATION	  SESSION	  BEFORE	  ENGAGING	  IN	  EXPOSURE	  TASKS. Time: 30	  minutes	  to allow for enough discussion Outline • Define exposure o Ensure the student that exposure tasks will start with	  situations that are	  lower on their fear hierarchy • Describe the rationale and	  reason	  for	  exposure	  o Habituation o Practice of coping skills o Identification 	  of 	  automatic 	  thoughts o Challenging of automatic thoughts • Describe the process of preparing for and	  completing an	  exposure task • Give to	  student and opportunity to discuss	  their concerns	  to the	  point that they	  feel	  comfortable preparing for	  the first	  exposure task Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  3) • White board/chalk board • Understanding Exposure	  Handout(one	  for	  each student;	  see 	  pages 102.103) • SampleExposurePreparation	  Handout(oneforeach	  student;	  see 	  page 104) It is 	  recommended 	  that 	  you give the handout to	  the students	  after you	  have completed the	  discussion. It’s	  important that they	  pay	  attention to your description	  rather than	  read	  ahead	  on	  their own. Defining Exposure [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: The	  key to	  Phase	  3	  is therapeutic	  exposure	  to	  feared	  situations. Exposure means	  facing the situations	  that make you nervous.	  Write this on the board. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:Afterall, the 	  whole 	  point	  of 	  this 	  process 	  is to 	  help you do	  the things that you	  currently	  can’t/or	  avoid doing because of your	  fear	  or	  anxiety. Now that you have	  learned how to calm yourself down	  and	  how to	  modify your negative self-..talk,	  you 	  are 	  ready to	  start	  using	  thesetoolstogether	  in real life situations. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: We will start with the easier situations and	  work	  up	  to 	  the 	  harder 	  ones.	  We will likely start with role plays and imagined 	  situations,	  and	  gradually	  move to	  real life situations. And we	  will move	  at a pace	  that you are comfortable with. If	  you	  ever	  think we’re moving too fast, just tell me and we’ll slow	  down. The	  goal is to	  help	  you	  feel and	  be	  successful. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:It 	  usually 	  takes 	  several	  exposures 	  to 	  the 	  same situation 	  for 	  your 	  anxiety 	  to 	  decrease 	  dramatically. 	  Thus,	  we 	  will	  repeat 	  each exposure	  several times until your anxiety for that situation has decreased and you	  are experiencing	  some success	  in	  using	  your	  skills	  in	  that situation. Rationale for	  Exposure [Group	  Leader/Counselor]: Before we get started	  with	  the exposures, it’s important 	  for 	  you 	  to 	  understand 	  why 	  we 	  are 	  going 	  to 	  use 	  this 	  strategy.	  There	  are four	  reasons	  why	  exposure is	  helpful. 1. Habituation: Write this word on the board. [Group Leader/Counselor]: Habituation means that you get used to a situation. If	  you 	  stay in a 	  situation 	  long 	  enough,	  your 	  anxiety 	  will	  eventually level off and decrease. Remember the	  activation and calming systems? Your	  activation	  system can	  only	  stay	  activated	  for	  so long, before the calming	  system steps up	  and	  takes control to	  calm your	  body	  down. This is the body’s way	  of taking	  care of itself. When you stop being as	  activated	  in	  a	  situation	  that used	  to	  make you	  nervous, this	  is	  called	  habituation. You	  may	  not have noticed	  this for	  two	  reasons, either	  (1) the situation was	  too short for	  the calming system to kick it (e.g., raising your	  hand	  and	  speaking	  up	  in	  class only	  takes a	  few minutes) or	  (2) your	  negative thoughts keep	  feeding	  your	  anxiety	  so	  you	  keep	  “telling” your	  activation	  system that there is	  a	  threat and	  to	  stay	  alert. Exposure tasks	  allow you	  to	  stay	  in	  the situation	  long	  enough	  for	  you	  to	  habituate or	  start the calming process. 2. Practice: Write this word on the board. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Many	  times	  your	  anxiety	  leads you to 	  avoid 	  or leave 	  the 	  situation. 	  Thus,	  you 	  never 	  get 	  any 	  better 	  at 	  demonstrating 	  the behaviors	  thatyou	  need	  to	  besuccessful(e.g.,	  like 	  deep 	  breathing 	  or correcting	  negative	  self-..talk).	  Would 	  you 	  expect	  yourself to	  be 	  able	  to drivea	  car	  wellin	  an	  emergency(e.g.,	  get	  a 	  friend to	  the 	  hospital) if you’ve never	  driven	  a	  car	  before? No. So,why	  expectthat	  of 	  yourself	  with these 	  behaviors? 	  Exposures give you	  a	  chance to	  practice the needed	  behaviors in	  a	  safeplacefirst(e.g.,	  with 	  me in	  role 	  plays)	  and in	  real	  situations	  with your	  new coping skills	  and support from me and others. 3. Identifying Automatic Thoughts: Write this on the board. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  There	  are	  likely some	  automatic	  thoughts that only	  occur	  when	  you’re right in	  the middle of	  an	  anxiety-..provoking	  situation to feed your	  anxiety	  and	  prevent the calming	  system from starting	  up. We need	  to	  identify	  the automatic	  thoughts	  that are so	  powerful in	  maintaining	  your	  anxiety	  and	  give you	  a	  tool or	  a	  weapon to challenge	  them. Exposures will give	  you	  a	  chance	  to	  practice	  using	  a	  weapon against these	  powerful thoughts	  so that you can start to break the cycle	  of anxiety. 4. Challenging Automatic Thoughts: Write this on the board. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Right now, you are	  convinced that your automatic	  thoughts	  are accurate (e.g., if	  you	  mess	  up, other	  students	  won’t hang out with you). And if you are avoiding situations where you might mess up, you have no way to test if this thought is accurate or	  not. Exposures	  allow you	  to	  try	  the behavior	  and	  test the thought. Two	  things	  will likely happen. First, you may learn that more often than not, you actually	  don’t mess	  up. Second, even	  if	  you	  do	  mess	  up, students will still hang	  outwith 	  you 	  because 	  most	  people 	  messup	  on	  thingsevery	  now and	  then.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Hopefully now you can see	  that exposure	  tasks put it all together. They	  address the physiology/feelings, thoughts, and	  behaviors of anxiety	  and	  give you	  a	  chance to practice and	  get good	  at using	  the tools/skills in	  your	  tool box. The	  Process for Each	  Exposure [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Now, let’s talk about the	  process for each exposure. Because we want the exposures to	  go	  well for	  you, we’ll take some time planning	  for	  each	  one. This process seems a	  little long	  for	  the first one, but it becomes easier	  and	  quicker	  with	  each	  one we do. [With 	  Group]:	  Describethefollowingprocess. Consider	  writing 	  the 	  steps 	  on 	  the board. After you	  have explained	  the steps, use the Sample Exposure Preparation	  Handout (see page 104)	  and the	  case	  of	  Mark	  (described below)	  to demonstrate	  the	  process to students. Step	  1: Pick	  a	  situation. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We’ll	  start	  eachexposure	  taskby reviewingyour	  fear	  ladder.	  Initially 	  we’ll 	  pick a 	  situation 	  that	  has a	  rating 	  around 	  30 	  or 	  40.	  We don’t want it to	  be too	  anxiety	  provoking, but we also	  don’t want it to	  be too	  easy or you won’t get practice	  applying your skills. As you successfully complete	  exposures with lower ratings, we’ll pick	  situations	  with	  higher	  ratings. Initially, we’ll also pick a situation that is simple and easy to role play and that is most relevant to	  your	  daily	  activities.	  For 	  example,	  you 	  may 	  be 	  afraid 	  of 	  giving speeches	  in class, but if	  you don’t have to	  do	  that this semester, we may	  pick	  a	  different situation	  that you	  do	  have to	  deal with	  (e.g., talking	  to	  students during	  lunch). Step	  2: Anticipate	  your automatic thoughts and challenges to	  them. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Oncewepickasituation,I	  will	  have 	  you 	  imagine 	  the situation in as	  vivid detail as	  possible. Then you’ll write down 3 automatic thoughts 	  that	  you 	  are 	  likely to 	  have.	  We’ll 	  identify 	  the 	  thinkingerrors	  associated	  with	  these thoughts. Then, we’ll write	  down	  the	  challenges to	  these	  thoughts 	  and 	  the 	  helpful/coping responses. We’ll write these down	  so	  that you	  can	  use	  them as a	  script in	  the	  situation. Use the Exposure Preparation	  Handout (see page 105)	  to guide	  you through this	  process. Step	  3: Work	  out the	  details of the	  exposure. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  Next, we’ll plan out the	  situation. If it’s a role	  play between	  you	  and	  me, we’ll discuss the setting	  and	  the details of what is going	  to	  happen. If it’s an	  imaginal exposure, we’ll talk	  through	  the sights, sounds, smells,	  and 	  details 	  of 	  the 	  situation. If 	  it’s a 	  real	  life 	  exposure,	  we’ll	  discuss 	  the steps	  you will take before, during, and after	  the exposure. Step	  4: Set an	  achievable	  goal. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Just	  before we complete the exposure, we need to set	  an 	  “achievable 	  behavioral 	  goal” 	  so 	  that	  we 	  know 	  if 	  the 	  exposure 	  is a	  success.	  This goal should	  be	  very specific	  (rather than	  vague), at a level that you	  are	  likely 	  to 	  achieve,	  and 	  observable 	  to 	  others. 	  Examples 	  of 	  specific 	  and 	  non-..specific goals are provided 	  below. Write these goals down on the Exposure Preparation Worksheet. Specific	  Goals  Non-..Specific	  Goals  Make two statements about myself  Don’t get nervous  Invite 	  her	  to 	  the 	  dance  Make a good impression  Learn	  two	  things	  about that person  Be friendly  Ask the teacher about the assignment  Communicate effectively  Stay	  in	  the	  situation for	  20 minutes  Feel like I did	  a	  good	  job  Step	  5: Complete	  the	  exposure. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: Just	  prior to the exposure, you will make a prediction	  about how anxious	  you	  will get during	  the exposure. We will complete	  the	  exposure,	  and 	  I	  will	  ask 	  you to	  make 	  ratings 	  of 	  anxiety 	  throughout	  the 	  exposure.	  Depending on the	  duration of	  the	  role	  play, try to get	  3	  to 5	  ratings	  before	  it	  ends.	  These ratings provide concrete evidence that anxiety	  is decreasing. Thus, this provides a	  cue to	  you	  how the student is feeling	  and	  how long	  the exposure needs to last.	  You must	  have	  the	  student	  remain in the	  exposure	  until	  it	  decreases at	  least	  a little.	  [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:I	  may 	  also 	  prompt 	  you 	  to 	  use 	  your coping statements.	  Offer supportive coaching statements during the exposure if the adolescent is unable to	  apply	  them on	  his/her own. “It might be helpful to	  take a	  few deep	  breaths here.”	  “Remember to	  use your rational response script”. “What would	  be helpful to	  say	  to	  yourself right now?” [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]:	  We will remain in the situation as long as it takes for your	  anxiety	  to	  drop.Then	  wewill endthe 	  exposure 	  and 	  review 	  how 	  it	  went. [With 	  Group]:	  Additional important points to cover	  about	  Step 5: • Act out the role play or imagined	  situation as completely	  as possible • Don’tbreakrolesorstopthe role 	  play 	  until	  it’s 	  complete • Do use your script as a reminder, as needed • Doprovide anxiety	  ratings 	  as 	  quickly 	  as 	  possible 	  without	  belaboring 	  the rating • Don’t be disappointed if it’s difficult or doesn’t go well. Remember to praise yourself for effort not outcome. It takes repeated	  exposures to	  fully break	  the	  cycle. • If 	  you avoid	  experiencing	  anxiety	  in	  exposures, it may	  help	  in	  the short run, 	  but	  it	  will	  maintain anxiety in the long run. Step	  6: Review the	  exposure. [Group 	  Leader/Counselor]: After the	  exposure	  is over, we	  will take	  a deep breath	  and	  relax	  for	  a	  few minutes. Then	  we will discuss how it went. Specifically, we will review your	  predicted	  ratings, your	  actual ratings, how well you	  used	  your	  skills	  (deep	  breathing	  and	  thought restructuring), and	  whether	  or	  not you	  achieved	  your	  goal. Have students complete the final two questions on the Exposure Preparation Worksheet. To	  help	  you	  prepare for the exposure preparation	  meeting, the exposure tasks, and	  the exposure review meetings,	  we have provided a sample	  below. ******************************************************************* Sample Role Play	  Exposure (The 	  Case 	  of 	  Mark) Situation: Mark is a	  freshman who is very anxious about	  speaking in groups. On his fear hierarchy, raising his hand, waiting to be called on, and providing an answer is listed at	  an anxiety rating of 60. He has significant	  anticipatory anxiety while waiting for the teacher to call on him, he worries that	  he’ll pass out, not	  be able to answer the question or look stupid. The	  goal 	  of	  this	  exposure	  is	  to 	  simulate	  a	  classroom	  (using	  the	  counselor	  as	  the	  teacher,	  and three 	  other 	  students	  from the 	  group	  as	  the 	  class).	  The counselor and Mark	  have agreed on the following: • The exposure will likely last	  15 to 20	  minutes • The counselor will offer several opportunities for Mark to raise his hand and answer questions, but	  Mark will not	  know when these will occur • Mark will raise his hand at	  least	  two or three times to answer a	  question, but	  he can decide when he will do this • The counselor will be lecturing on a	  topic that	  has previously been covered in Mark’s science class and that	  Mark is familiar with • In order to obtain anxiety ratings from Mark, the counselor will periodically hold up a	  card that	  has a	  question mark on it. Each time she holds this up, Mark will quickly report	  his anxiety rating. (Mark can write these down, or he can have a	  peer write down his	  ratings on a	  piece of paper (see 	  Exposure Worksheet	  on	  page 	  106)	  so that	  the counselor and Mark can review all of them at	  the end of the exposure. • The other students will act	  as peers in the class, occasionally raising their hands to answer questions. Prior	  to 	  the	  exposure, Mark	  has identified automatic thoughts that would likely occur • “I’m going to pass out” • “The other student	  are going to laugh at	  me” • “I’ll say something stupid” To challenge these automatic thoughts, the counselor and Mark	  examined 	  the	  evidence	  for	  each thought, the likelihood of the situation happening, and the outcomes if it did happen. For the first	  thought, they discussed that	  even though Mark feels like he is going to pass out, he actually has never passed out	  before and he has used deep breathing to reduce dizziness before (see the sample dialogue in the box below). For the second thought, they discussed a	  time when other students have gotten the answer wrong (which happens about	  25% of the time) and how often other kids laugh at	  them (about	  10% of the time because the teacher does not	  tolerate disrespect). They discussed how often his answer to the teacher’s question is correct	  (e.g., about	  75%). They discussed that	  even if kids get	  laughed at, it’s not	  the end of the world (i.e., people don’t	  stop being friends with someone just	  because they made a	  mistake). For the third thought, they made some connections to the discussion about	  not	  passing out	  and about	  how often people make mistakes. They also discussed how well Mark knew the class material. Sample 	  Script	  for 	  Testing	  the 	  Evidence Counselor (C): I’m wondering if you’ve ever passed out	  in class before. Mark (M): Well, not	  really passed out, but	  very close. My body totally freaks out. I	  get	  dizzy and sweaty and the room is swaying. C: So, 	  it really feels like you’re about	  to pass out, but	  you have never lost	  consciousness? M: No, I	  guess not. C: If you don’t	  pass out, what	  happens? M: Well, I	  usually put	  my head down on the table and close my eyes. C: So, that	  helps you not	  pass out? M: Yea, I	  guess I	  look up and check the room to see if it’s spinning. When it	  stops, I	  know I	  can sit	  back up again. C: Well, I’m glad you’ve found something that	  keeps you from passing out. Have you ever tried to use your deep breathing or muscle relaxation (hand squeezing) during this situation? M: Yea, actually, I	  did remember to use it	  once or twice. It’s hard for me to remember to use it	  when I’m freaking out. C: Yes, it	  can be hard to remember to use it. But	  it	  sounds like you did once or twice. That’s a	  great	  start. Did it	  help? M: Yea, I	  was surprised but	  it	  did. I	  just	  stared at	  a	  spot	  on the wall and after several deep breathes, I	  was feeling better. C: Good I’m glad to hear this. It	  sounds like you were in control of getting your body to go from freaking out	  to a	  calmer state. M: Yea, sort	  of. C: So let’s get	  back to your first	  automatic thought	  and review a	  bit	  of the evidence. The thought	  was “I’m going to pass out.” You said you’ve actually never passed out. So 0% of the time you’ve passed out	  and 100% of the time you’ve not	  passed out. What	  is the likelihood that	  you will pass out	  in this situation in the future? M: Well, when you put	  it	  that	  way, I	  have to say not	  very likely. C: I	  would agree with you. And, even though this situation makes you very uncomfortable, is there some evidence that	  you can get	  control over this in the moment? M: A little, I	  guess, if I	  can remember to use my deep breathing. C: I	  would agree as well. Would it	  be helpful for you to give yourself a	  cue to remember to do it? Some students have put	  a	  small piece of paper in their pocket	  or even on their desk. So let’s see if we can come up with a	  Coping Statement	  to challenge this automatic thought	  when it comes to your mind. “I’m going to pass out.” What	  could you say to yourself instead? M: Umm, how about	  “It hasn’t happened before. If you use your breathing, you can calm down.” C: That’s great. Let’s write that	  down. Do	  you also want	  to add this statement	  to the paper in your pocket? They identified Coping Statements that Mark	  could use for each thought • “It’s not	  happened before. If I	  use my breathing, I	  can calm down.” • “People make mistakes. I	  know my close friends won’t	  laugh at	  me” • “I’ve studied this. I	  can at	  least	  say something close to what	  the teacher wants” Mark’s achievable goal: • Raise my hand to answer at	  least	  2 questions • Use deep breathing if my anxiety starts to spike Mark’s Anxiety Prediction: • He thinks his anxiety will rise to a	  50 Sample Role Play Exposure: The counselor tells the group that	  they are about	  to begin the role play and to remain in role until the role play his complete. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s initial anxiety rating. Mark says 40. The counselor acting as the teacher, welcomes the students to class, introduces the topic, and passes out	  a	  worksheet	  (she copied this from Mark’s science teacher). She asks a	  question of the group Mark raises his hand but	  the teacher calls on	  someone 	  else. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s initial anxiety rating. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 55. The counselor gives the directions for the worksheet	  and how the class is going to complete it	  together. She begins working through the first	  problem as a	  sample. She asks a	  question of the group. Mark raises his hand and the teacher calls on him. He answers successfully. The teacher continues with the problem. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 50. Mark is starting to do some deep breathing. The teacher finished demonstrating the first	  problem with the group. She tells them to complete the second problem on their own and that	  the group will discuss their answers when complete. She tells the group to work on the problem and turn their paper over	  when they are done. While the group works, she walks over to Mark. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 35. After about	  5 minutes, the students all have their pages turned over. The teacher asks for a	  few students to share their answers. Mark does not	  raise his hand. The teacher calls on a	  peer who does. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 45. The peer answers. The teacher asks for another student	  to share their answer. Mark raises his hand. The teacher calls on him and he answers. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 45. The teacher tells the students to complete another problem on their own. While the group works, she walks over to Mark. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 30. After a	  few minutes the teacher asks a	  student	  to share their answer. Mark raises his hand. The teacher calls on him and he answers. She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 35. The teacher calls on one other student	  She displays the Question Mark Card to get	  Mark’s anxiety rating. Mark says 25. The counselor then announces the end of the role play. The other students are thanked for their participation and dismissed Mark	  and the Counselor review the exposure: C: So what	  did you think? M: Well, I	  thought	  it	  went	  okay. C: Yes, what	  makes you say that? M: Well, I	  think I	  did what	  I	  said I	  was going to do. C: You mean you achieved your goals? Wow, that’s’ great. Let’s review them. You said that	  you would answer two questions. Did you do that? M: Yes C: 	  Yes, 	  you	  did! You said that	  you would use deep breathing. Were you able to do this? M: Yea, after that	  first	  question, I	  noticed that	  my anxiety spiked. It	  was higher than I	  thought	  it	  might	  go. I	  didn’t	  think that	  the role play would be close to the real classroom, but	  it	  was. So I	  started to use it	  so that	  I	  wouldn’t	  freak out	  like I	  do in class. C: First, that’s great	  that	  you noticed your anxiety levels and remember to use it. And second, it	  sounds like your deep breathing worked. M: Yes, I	  guess so. C: You mentioned that	  your anxiety spiked higher than you thought. Let’s see, yes, you predicted that	  your anxiety would get	  as high as 50, but	  your rating indicates that	  it	  got	  up to a	  55. This is actually pretty close. What	  do think about	  this? M: Well, I	  guess these role plays can make things seem pretty real. C: Yes, so that’s good because if you prove to yourself that	  you can manage your anxiety in these roles plays, then we can have some confidence that	  you can manage your anxiety in the real situations. Also, I	  was thinking that	  this gives us confidence that	  you are a	  good judge of your anxiety. I	  don’t	  think we’ll need to adjust	  anything on your fear hierarchy do you? M: No probably not. But, man, I	  don’t	  want	  to do any role plays that	  are rated higher than this yet. C: Ok. That’s important	  for us to consider. Maybe we should repeat	  this one a	  few times until you are more comfortable with it	  before moving up the hierarchy. M: Ok. C: I	  also wanted to ask you about	  your automatic thoughts. Did you have the ones that	  you had expected? Review them	  from	  the list. M: Well, I	  was a	  little concerned about	  passing out	  when my anxiety went	  up to the 55, but	  I	  guess since we had talked about	  how my body probably wouldn’t	  do that, it	  didn’t	  spiral out	  of control. C: Okay, so maybe our discussion about	  testing out	  the evidence for that	  automatic thought	  was helpful. Let’s remember to do that	  again before the next	  exposure. What	  about	  the other thoughts? M: Well, because it	  was a	  role play with other students from the group, I	  wasn’t	  as worried about	  them laughing at	  me. But	  yea, I	  guess I	  was still a	  little worried about	  saying something stupid. C: And did you say anything stupid? M: No, I	  guess not. C: So, thinking about	  all of this, what	  can you take from this experience? M: Well, I	  guess I	  met	  my goal, so that’s cool and these things are more real than I	  thought	  they would be so, it	  seems like I	  will get	  to practice some of the skills you’re teaching us. C: Yes, those are great	  lessons. Even though this was hard and your anxiety spiked a	  little, you DID achieve your goal, so now you have evidence that	  you can do it. It	  also sounds like your deep breathing can help to calm you down. So remember that, and keep using it. Great	  job today. Should we plan to repeat	  this next	  week? M: Ok C: And in the mean time, try to pay attention to your anxiety cues, and when you feel	  your anxiety start	  to spike, you can use the rational responses that	  you used today and your deep breathing. Hang in there. You’re going great. ******************************************************************* Questions to guide the exposure review (You may ask any subset	  of these and in any order) 1.	  Your 	  predicted	  anxiety	  rating was a X. Your actual ratings were X, Y, and Z. What do you make of this pattern? Often their predicted ratings are higher than their actual ones. If so, discuss how anxiety can lead us to ‘expecting things to be worse than they actually are’. Discuss	  how we should anticipate this and not	  ‘treat	  these types of thought	  as accurate.’ Also, consider whether adjustments need to be made to the ratings on the fear hierarchy. If the prediction was a good match, you could frame this as the student	  being a good judge of what	  to expect. Indicate that	  you shouldn’t	  have to adjust	  the fear hierarchy if this is the case. 2.	  Your 	  first	  anxiety	  rating	  was X 	  and the others	  were Y	  and	  Z. What can we learn from this pattern.? If the exposure served to help them	  habituate to their anxiety, the ratings should decrease. If so, use this as evidence to support	  what	  the student	  has learned about	  the activation and calming system. If not, discuss what	  you might	  change about	  the exposure for the next	  repetition (e.g., inducing more anxiety at	  the start, staying in the role play longer, modifying the exposure so that	  it	  is more real life, identifying more effective rational responses. 3.	  Did	  you	  havetheautomaticthoughts	  that	  you	  expected	  to	  have? If so, praise the student	  for identifying the relevant	  thoughts and planning to challenge them. If not, normalize that	  it	  is common for unexpected thoughts to pop up and discuss how to use these in the next	  exposure.	  4.	  What	  additional	  automatic 	  thoughts	  emerged? Develop rational responses to these for the next	  exposure. 5.	  How	  well	  did	  the 	  rational	  response 	  script	  do	  in	  combating	  the 	  automatic thoughts? Discuss what	  to keep using and what	  to refine. 6.	  Did	  you	  meet	  your goal? 	  Why	  or 	  Why	  Not? Make sure that	  the student	  looks at	  the concrete evidence and does not	  use a thinking error to judge themselves too harshly. Offer praise to the student	  who achieves his/her goal and encouragement	  and support	  for those who did not	  achieve their goal. 7. What can you take from this experience for the future? Common take away messages to focus on are: If I	  hang in there, it	  gets easier Even though I	  was nervous, I	  still made my goal Even though I	  feel panicky I	  won’t	  pass out It	  was harder than I	  thought, but	  I	  made it	  through Once I	  get	  through the first	  several minutes, I	  feel better I’m	  in more control of me than my anxiety is Deep breathing can help calm	  me down in the moment Challenging my automatic	  thoughts can help me keep my thinking straight Topic	  2:	  Individual 	  Exposure 	  Tasks Time: 20-..30	  minutes	  depending	  on each individual student’s	  hierarchy Outline • Complete the Exposure Preparation	  Worksheet with	  the student (see	  page	  105) • Completetheexposure,documentingleast	  3 to 5	  anxiety	  ratingson	  the Exposure Worksheet (page 106) • Review the exposure task, using the questions in	  the box on	  the previous page Materials Needed (see	  Appendix Phase	  3) • Exposure Preparation	  Worksheet (see	  page	  105) • Exposure Worksheet (see	  page	  106) Exposure tasks require creativity.	  There are several common	  exposure activities.	  You may build	  off of the ideas below as you	  create the exposure tasks for your students. Activities for Exposures Imaginal	  exposures (conduct	  this type of exposure in private): In a	  conversation, have the student	  tell you about	  the situation in detail, including what	  they see, hear, feel, think, taste, and smell in the situation. Once you have these details, guide the student	  through the situation in their imagination using all the details you just	  gathered. Initially, use vivid descriptions to heighten their anxiety. Use a	  lot	  of anticipatory anxiety statements to build up the situation. Continue to describe the situation so that	  they remain in the imagined situations for a	  prolonged time (5 to 10 minutes at	  least) until they habituate. Remember to gather anxiety ratings 3 to 5 times throughout	  the scenario. See the script for an example. Group Role Plays (using several	  students	  from the 	  group) Create a	  classroom environment	  where a	  student	  has to raise their hand to be called upon.	  Have the scenario last	  20 minutes and have the student	  raise their hand 3 to 4 times, so that	  they habituate to the task. Group Role Plays	  (continued) Create a	  test	  environment	  (get	  copies of a	  previously completed test) where a	  student	  has to complete a	  test. Have the scenario last	  20 minutes, so that	  they habituate to the task. Create an unstructured social situation (e.g., like students entering a	  classroom before the class starts, lunch time, riding the bus), where student	  have to make small talk/interact	  informally Create a	  situation, where one student	  invites another to do activity Create a	  situation, where one student	  has to initiate a	  conversation with a	  teacher to clarify information about	  a	  longer term project Create a	  situation where the student	  makes a	  mistake in front	  of others (e.g., gives a	  wrong answer in a	  class, pays for something but	  gives an inaccurate amount	  of money, turns two assignments in, but	  in the opposite basket).	  Have peers snicker or make a	  teasing statement so	  that	  the student	  has to endure some mild discomfort, but	  then have those peers speak to them nicely again and dismiss/forget	  the mistake so that	  the student	  learns that	  mistakes do not	  result	  in catastrophe. Have the scenario last	  long enough that	  the student	  can use a	  coping model out	  loud Create a	  scenario where someone walks into a	  room and others are talking quietly. Create a	  party atmosphere where someone has to tell a	  joke Create a	  situation where the student	  has to give a	  speech or read a	  poem in front	  of others In-..vivo/	  real	  life exposures Have the student	  engage in any of the above as an in-..vivo task.	  During the early in-..vivo exposures, it	  may be helpful to inform the teacher or adult	  in the situation that	  the student	  will be completing the exposure. Similarly, students may choose to enlist	  a	  close friend to help them. One-..A-..Day-..Keeps-..Anxiety-..Away Tasks Help the students develop a	  habit	  of doing one small exposure per day Say hello to someone you typically do not	  speak to Give someone a	  compliment Speak up one extra	  time in a	  class or in a	  group setting Make small talk with someone Write in front	  of others Take a	  drink from a	  water fountain in front	  of others Make a	  mistake on purpose. (Provide the exact	  change for a	  purchase but	  put	  in one coin extra, spill a	  little water out	  of your water bottle) Drive down one street	  they typically do not	  drive down APPENDIX TABLE	  OF	  CONTENTS 1. Orientation Session Handouts (p.	  74) 2. Phase	  1 Handouts (p.	  76) 3. Phase	  2 Handouts (p.	  88) 4. Phase	  3 Handouts (p.	  102) APPENDIX Orientation Session 1. Ice 	  Breaker	  Activities Ice 	  Breaker 	  Activities 1. Have a	  ball with written questions and toss it	  to each other and wherever their right	  index finger catches the ball, they will answer the question. (Question examples: Whom do you look up to most	  in your family? If you were to go anywhere in the world where would you go? What’s important	  to you about	  your culture?) 2. Two truths and a	  lie activity. Everyone shares two truths and one lie and the rest	  of the group tries to figure out	  which statement	  was a	  lie. 3. Have group members write down a	  certain type of occupation (e.g., firefighter, ballerina, rock star, physician) in private and then have the facilitator stick the Post-..it	  on the group members’ foreheads. The group then agrees to interact	  with the person with the Post-..it	  in a	  way that	  addresses them like the person written on their forehead. The Post-..it	  member can also ask yes/no questions of other members to try to determine who they are on the Post-..it. The objective is for the member with the Post-..it	  to try to figure out	  what	  is written on the Post-..it. 4. Do an activity called Link it. The goal of activity is for everyone in the group to find something they can relate to in someone else. By finding something they connect	  on, they “link” arms until a	  circle is formed (the last	  person has to find something to relate to with the first	  person to close circle). The first	  person (Group leader) begins by listing things that	  describe them (activities they enjoy, their family, pets, vacations, etc) until someone in group hears something they have in common with the first	  person and “links” (put	  arms together like one is escorting the other). Then, the second person in the chain begins to list	  things that	  describe them until someone links to them and so on until everyone is linked in a	  circle. APPENDIX Phase	  1 1. Upside Down	  U-..Shaped	  Curve	  of Anxiety 2. The Physiology	  of Anxiety 3. Phase	  1	  ReCCaP	  Log 4. Situations, Thoughts, Feelings, Behavior Table 5. Spiral of Anxiety Handout 6. Anxiety	  Rating	  Scale 7. What is Your Anxiety Rating Now? 8. Fear Hierarchy	  Brainstorming	  Example 9. Fear Hierarchy	  Brainstorming	  Worksheet 10.Final Fear Hierarchy 11.End	  of Phase 1	  Assessment Upside	  Down	  U-..Shaped	  Curve	  of Anxiety The figure below shows anxiety or activation on	  the bottom (x-..axis). On the	  left	  is low 	  anxiety	  and 	  on 	  the 	  right	  is	  high 	  anxiety.	  The 	  figure 	  also 	  shows performance (how well you	  complete a task on	  the side (y-..axis). Toward the	  bottom, it shows weak or low performance (not completing a task	  very	  well)	  and toward the	  top, it shows	  strong	  or high performance	  (doing	  really well on a	  task). Together this	  graph shows	  that, when our anxiety is	  really low OR	  really 	  high, 	  our	  performance is 	  low.	  When 	  anxiety is 	  too 	  low, 	  we’re 	  not	  motivated, we don’t really care, and	  we don’t perform well. When	  anxiety is too high, we’re panicked, frozen, over-..focused, or	  overwhelmed and we don’t	  perform well. But when	  our anxiety is just right (in	  the middle), we show our bestperformance. This isknown	  our	  optimal	  level	  of	  anxiety.	  When we are motivated, engaged, and focused we do our best. This graph	  may help	  you	  understand	  why some anxiety is	  good and how too	  much anxiety interferes with performance. The goal of this anxiety group	  is to	  help	  you	  learn	  how to	  manage or cope with	  your anxiety when	  it gets too	  high	  and bring	  it back down to a	  level that allows	  you to perform at your best. The	  Physiology	  of	  Anxiety The picture below shows all the places in	  your body where you	  may feel the physiological sensations of anxiety. Which sensations do you feel when you are anxious? Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Phase	  1 ReCCaP Log Select a	  situation	  that made you	  feel anxious or nervous this week and	  complete the boxes below • The situation: what was happening around	  you? • Thoughts: what went through	  your mind	  during this situation	  (typically a	  sentence)? • Feelings: what emotions were you feeling (typically one word)? • Behavior: what did	  you	  do	  as a	  result of these thoughts and	  feelings? 1.	  Situation  2.	  Thought/s  3.	  Feeling/s  4.	  Behavior  Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Situation, Thoughts, Feelings, Behavior	  Table Situation  Thought  Feeling  Behavior  Phone Rings  It’s	  my	  teacher  It’s	  my	  (girl)friend	  calling	  about a party	  this	  weekend  It’s	  the doctor with 	  news	  about	  my 	  Grandma  Situation  Thought  Feeling  Behavior  Anxiety	  Spiral Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Anxiety	  Rating	  Scale Anxiety Rating  Situation  Cues:	  Physiological 	  Sensations,	  Feelings,	  Thoughts,	  Behaviors  100  90  80  70  60  50  40  30  20  10  Anchors 100	  – The most anxious	  or panicked you have ever been . . 50	  – Anxiety that is	  uncomfortable and bothersome . . 0	  – The most Calm or relaxed you have ever been Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ What is Your Anxiety Now? In the boxes below, describe what	  you are currently doing and provide an anxiety rating. Discuss the impact	  of your activity on your anxiety rating. Describe your current	  activity: Sitting Calmly in Group  Rate your anxiety  Describe	  your	  new	  activity: Thinking about	  _______________________________  Describe	  your	  new	  activity:  Describe	  your	  new	  activity:  Describe	  your	  new	  activity:  Describe	  your	  new	  activity:  Fear	  Ladder Brainstorming	  Example Part 1: Mary	  writes down	  several ideas and	  then	  rates them  Rating  Situation  70  Talking with	  other students  30  Talking to	  parents about school  90  Taking	  the	  State Graduation Test  30  Open book pop quizzes  60  Asking questions in social studies  50  Forgetting something while taking a tests  80  Telling parents about grades  40  Studying for a	  big test  70  Getting bad	  grades  Part 2:	  Mary 	  selects 	  one 	  of 	  the 	  main fears	  from above (taking the 	  OGT) and	  expands her list for	  this	  fear	  (see 	  below)	  by	  thinking	  about dimensions or situations	  that make her	  anxiety ratings	  for	  this	  fear	  higher	  and lower.  90  Taking the State Graduation	  Test  80  Taking a	  mid-..term exam  70  Forgetting something while taking a	  test  60  Taking a	  closed book	  pop quiz  50  Hearing teachers talk about preparing for the State Test  40  Studying for a	  big test  30  Taking an	  open	  book pop	  quiz  20  Studying for a	  scheduled quiz  10  Thinking about taking a test  Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Fear	  Ladder Brainstorming	  Worksheet Below list several situations	  that make you anxious. List several that make you very anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating would range from 70 to 90), several that make you moderately anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating would range from 40 to 60), and several that make you only mildly anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating	  would	  range from 	  20 	  to	  40). Rating  Situation  Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Final	  Fear Ladder Below list several situations	  that make you anxious. List several that make you very anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating would range from 70 to 90), several that make you moderately anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating would range from 40 to 60), and several that make you only mildly anxious	  (those in which your anxiety rating	  would	  range from 	  20 	  to	  40). Rating  Situation  End	  of	  Phase	  1	  Assessment To determine if the student	  is ready to move to Phase 2, Counselors/Group facilitators will have students answer the following 10 questions. (Note: Students may replace the word anxiety/anxious with other words, such as nervous or stressed, if desired.) State or	  write 	  in 	  your 	  own 	  words: 1. How anxiety	  can	  be helpful: 2. How anxiety	  can	  be harmful: 3. What are some common	  thoughts that people/you	  think	  when	  anxious? 4. What are some common	  feelings/emotions words associated	  with	  anxiety? 5. Where in	  your	  body	  do	  people/you	  feel anxiety? 6. What are some common	  behaviors or	  things that people/you	  do when anxious? 7. Give an	  example of how a	  thought/s influence feelings and	  behavior/s 8. Describe a	  situation	  that makes you	  very	  anxious, and	  then	  rate the intensity of your	  anxiety	  in	  this situation. 9. Describe a	  situation	  that only	  makes you	  a	  little anxious and	  then	  rate the intensity 	  of 	  your 	  anxiety in 	  this 	  situation. 10. The student has created	  a final fear	  ladder?	  Yes No APPENDIX Phase	  2 1. Thinking	  Errors 2. Automatic Thoughts and	  Thinking	  Errors Handout 3. Phase	  2	  ReCCaP	  Log 4. Challenging	  Automatic Thoughts Handout 5. Talking	  Back to	  Fear Worksheet 6. What ifs Worksheet 7. Rational Responses Handout 8. Experimenting	  to	  Test Your Thoughts Log 9. My Reward List 10. End	  of Phase	  2	  Assessment Thinking	  Errors 1. Black	  or White Thinking. This is when you think situations are either one way or the exact	  opposite and there is no in between (things are black or white, but	  not	  grey). For example, someone might	  think that	  if you make a	  mistake, you are stupid, and if you don’t	  make a	  mistakes, you are cool. This is problematic because in real life everyone makes mistakes, and making mistakes does not	  automatically result	  in one extreme (being stupid) or another (being cool). 2. Fortune Telling. This is when you predict	  or “know” that	  something bad is going to happen. For example, knowing that	  you’ll look stupid speaking in front	  of the class. This is problematic because there is no way to know the future for certain. 3. Worst	  Case 	  Scenario. This is when people believe that	  the worst	  thing that	  could possibly happen will happen. For example, believing that	  if you speak in front	  of the class that	  you’ll throw up and everyone will see it	  and laugh at	  you. Like fortune telling, it	  is impossible to predict	  the future with 100% accuracy. 4. Relying On Emotions. This occurs when you think something has to be true because you “feel” or believe it	  so strongly that	  it	  must	  be true. This is problematic because this can cause people to disregarding evidence indicating that	  the belief is not	  true. 5. Mind Reading. This is when you believe you know what	  others are thinking. For example, when giving a	  presentation in front	  of the class one might	  think “they must	  think I’m an idiot.” We cannot	  know for sure what	  people are thinking. 6. “Should” and “Must”. As the name implies, these are thoughts that	  include the words should or must. For example, “I	  must	  look stupid”, “They should hate me”, or “I	  should be better.” (Modified from Hope et al., 2000 and	  Kendall et al., 2002) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Automatic Thoughts	  and	  Thinking	  Errors	  Handout Below are several faces. Consider the situation	  and	  identify possible automatic thoughts that each	  person	  may have. Then, identify the thinking errors that characterize	  the	  automatic thoughts. #1 #1	  Automatic thought/s: #1 Thinking Error/s: #2	  Automatic thought/s: #2	  Thinking Error/s: Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ #3	  Automatic thought/s: #3	  Thinking Error/s: #4 #4	  Automatic thought/s: #4	  Thinking Error/s: Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ #5 #5	  Automatic thought/s: #5	  Thinking Error/s: #6 #6	  Automatic thought/s: #6	  Thinking Error/s: Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ #7 #7	  Automatic thought/s: #7	  Thinking Error/s: #8 #8	  Automatic thought/s: #8	  Thinking Error/s: Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Phase	  2 ReCCaP Log Select	  a	  situation that	  made you feel anxious or nervous this week and complete the boxes below In the top row of boxes, write the situation, one automatic thought	  and thinking error, your feelings, anxiety rating and behaviors. In the bottom row, write a	  sentence to help you challenge your automatic thought, a	  coping statement, and consider your revised feelings, ratings and behaviors. Situation  Thoughts  Feeling  Anxiety Rating  Behavior  Automatic Thought: Thinking Error:  Challenge to Thinking Error: Coping	  Thought:  Revised Feeling  Revised Rating  Revised Behavior  CARS Anxiety Manual -..94 Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Challenging	  Automatic	  Thoughts Handout Use these questions to challenge you automatic thoughts. You will find each question helpful for many different thoughts. Several examples are also	  presented	  to	  help	  you	  get started. 1. Do I know for certain that ___________________________________________________? Example: Do	  I know for certain	  that I won’t do	  well on	  this test? 2. Am I 100% sure	  that _______________________________________________________? Example: Am I 100% sure that people will know I’m nervous? 3. What evidence	  do I have	  that ____________________________________________will happen? What evidence do I have that the opposite is true? Example: What evidence do	  I have that they will laugh	  at me? What evidence do I have that they	  will not laugh at me? 4. What is the	  worst that could happen?	  How bad is that?	  How can I cope	  with that? 5. Do I have	  a	  crystal ball? 6. Is there	  another explanation for _______________________________________________? Example: Is there another explanation for not being invited to the	  party? 7. Does _________________________	  have	  to lead to or equal ________________________? Example: Does “being	  nervous” have to	  lead	  to	  or equal “looking	  stupid?” 8. Is there	  another point of view? 9. What does _______________mean? Does ________________ really mean	  that I am a(n) ____________________________? Example: What does “looking	  like an	  idiot” mean?	  Does the fact that I tripped	  really mean	  that I looked 	  like 	  an 	  idiot? Now you try. Write down an automatic thought: Now use several of the questions above to challenge this thought: What is a	  new rationale thought that you can think	  instead of your automatic thought? Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Talking	  Back	  To	  Fear Worksheet My fear says (automatic thought):_______________________________________________________ Here are some things you could say to yourself that can help you talk back to your anxious feelings: • Scared feelings are like the wind. They blow over you and then they are gone. • Everybody feels scared sometimes. These feeling just	  make me human. • These feelings are just	  signals to use my new skills. • I	  know I	  can do this. The main reason I	  think I	  can’t	  is because I	  feel scared. I	  just	  have to remember it’s my fear talking. • Keep cool. I	  can talk back to my fear. • Is the worst	  thing that	  could happen in this situation really that	  bad? Write down five more things you can say to yourself to talk back to your fear: 1.__________________________________________________________________________ 2. __________________________________________________________________________ 3. __________________________________________________________________________ 4.__________________________________________________________________________ 5. __________________________________________________________________________ Write down these statements an index card.	  Read over them whenever you are feeling nervous or anxious. (Modified from Friedberg & McClure, 2002) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ “What If”	  Thinking	  Handout Many times when you worry, you wonder, “What if something bad happens?” You sometimes guess that	  the worst	  is going to happen and you won’t	  be able to handle it. This is called What If thinking. Let’s use this worksheet to challenge those thoughts. When I worry what if… ___________________________________________________ I	  feel	  really 	  scared 	  and 	  worried. Ask yourself questions: How sure am I that what I am worrying about will really happen? Circle one. Not Sure Pretty Sure Very Sure Has it ever happen before? Circle one. YES	  NO If it 	  has never happened	  in	  the past, how likely is 	  it to happen again/in the	  future?	  Circle	  one. Not at All Somewhat Likely Very Likely Now that you have answered these questions, what is a new way to talk back to your What If thinking? (Modified from Friedberg & 	  McClure, 	  2002) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Coping	  Response	  Handout On this worksheet, you will be creating	  a conversation between your “anxious self” and	  your “coping self.” Your anxious	  self is	  the part of you that has	  negative automatic	  thoughts. Your coping self is	  the part of you	  that responds to	  your negative automatic thoughts with	  a rational coping response. First, list	  an automatic thought you might have	  about a	  situation. Then write	  a	  response	  that your coping self might make to that thought. Then have your	  anxious self	  respond to coping self’s statement	  and so on. Anxious Self (Automatic Thought):  Coping Self (Rational Response):  Anxious Self:  Coping Self:  Anxious Self:  Coping Self:  Anxious Self:  Coping Self:  Anxious Self:  Coping Self:  Anxious Self:  Coping Self:  (Modified from Friedberg & McClure, 	  2002) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Experimenting 	  to 	  Test 	  Your 	  Thoughts 	  Handout At the beginning of each	  day this week, write the date in 	  the 	  first 	  column.	  	  Next, 	  rate 	  how 	  worried 	  you are	  that bad things will happen. Use	  a	  1	  (not	  worried at	  all)	  to 10 (extremely worried) scale. Then, at the of each	  day, write down	  the bad	  things that happened	  that day. Finally, rate on	  a scale of 1 (not bad	  at all) to 10	  (very bad, awful) how bad it actually was. Date  How Much I Worry (level of worry)  The	  Bad	  Things That Happened  How Bad Was It?  Do	  you	  see a pattern? What can	  you	  learn	  from	  this exercise? (Modified from Friedberg & McClure, 	  2002) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ My Rewards List When you are putting forth effort and working hard to implement	  the	  program 	  strategies, 	  you 	  deserve	  a 	  reward.	  Below list several rewards	  that you	  can	  give to	  yourself. Remember to	  reward	  yourself for effort not outcomes. End	  of	  Phase	  2 Assessment Student Name:	  Date: To	  determine if the student	  is ready	  to move to Phase 3, counselors/group leaders	  must observe the students implementing each of following skills without prompting from the counselor/group leader.	  The	  demonstration of	  the	  skills	  can be observed	  in	  group	  or in	  individual or ReCCaP sessions. Skill  Observed in Group  Observed in Individual	  or ReCCap Session  Deep	  Breathing  Muscle Relaxation  Identify 	  Automatic 	  Thoughts  Label Thinking	  Errors  Challenge Automatic Thoughts  Replace negative thoughts with	  helpful thoughts  Self-..evaluate  Self-..Reward  APPENDIX Phase	  3 1. Understanding	  Exposure Handout 2. Exposure Preparation	  Worksheet UNDERSTANDING	  EXPOSURE HANDOUT What	  is	  an exposure task? Exposure means facing the situations that	  make you nervous. Exposures start	  with the easier situations and work up to the harder ones. Exposures can be role plays with the counselor and group, imagined situations, or real life situations. The goal is to help you feel and be successful. If you ever think we’re moving too fast or feel too anxious in the exposures, tell your counselor. It	  usually takes several exposures to the same situation for your anxiety to decrease dramatically. We will repeat	  each exposure several times until your anxiety for that	  situation has decreased and you are experiencing some success in using your skills in that	  situation. Why is	  exposure helpful? 1.	  Habituation: If you stay in a	  situation long enough, your anxiety will eventually level off and decrease. Your body’s activation system can only stay activated for so long, before the calming system steps up and takes control to calm your body down. This is the body’s way of taking care of itself. When you stop being as activated in a	  situation that	  used to make you nervous, this is called habituation. You may not	  have noticed this for two reasons, either (1) the situation was too short	  for the calming system to kick it	  (e.g., raising your hand and speaking up in class only takes a	  few minutes) or (2) your negative thoughts keep feeding your anxiety so you keep “telling” your activation system that	  there is a	  threat	  and to stay alert. Exposure tasks allow you to stay in the situation long enough for you to habituate or start	  the calming process. 2.	  Practice: Many times your anxiety leads you to avoid or leave the situation. Thus, you never get	  any better at	  demonstrating the behaviors that	  you need to be successful (e.g., like deep breathing or correcting negative self-..talk). Exposures give you a	  chance to practice the needed behaviors in a	  safe place first	  (e.g., with me in role plays) and in real situations with your new coping skills and support	  from me and others. 3. Identification of Automatic Thoughts: There are likely some automatic thoughts that	  only occur when you’re right	  in the middle of an anxiety-..provoking situation to feed your anxiety and prevent	  the calming system from starting up. We need to identify the automatic thoughts that	  are so powerful in maintaining your anxiety and give you a	  tool or a	  weapon to challenge them. Exposures will give you a	  chance to practice using a	  weapon against	  these powerful thoughts so that	  you can start	  to break the cycle of anxiety. 4. Testing of Automatic Thoughts: Right	  now, you are convinced that	  your automatic thoughts are accurate (e.g., if you mess up, other students won’t	  hang out	  with you). And if you are avoiding situations where you might	  mess up, you have no way to test	  if this thought	  is accurate or not. Exposures allow you to try the behavior and test	  the thought. Two things will likely happen. First, you may learn that	  more often than not, you actually don’t	  mess up. Second, even if you do mess up, students will still hang out	  with you because most	  people mess up on things every now and then. How will we prepare for each exposure? Step 1: Pick	  a situation.	  We’ll start	  by reviewing your fear hierarchy. Initially we’ll pick a	  situation that	  has a	  rating around 30 or 40. We don’t	  want	  it	  to be too anxiety provoking, but	  we also don’t	  want	  it	  to be too easy or you won’t	  get	  practice applying your skills. Step 	  2: Anticipate your automatic thoughts	  and challenge them. Once we pick a	  situation, you’ll imagine the situation in as vivid detail as possible. Then, you’ll write down 3 automatic thoughts that	  you are likely to have. We’ll identify the thinking traps associated with these thoughts. Then, we’ll write down the challenges to these thoughts and the rational responses. We’ll write these down so that	  you can use them as a	  script	  in the situation. We	  will use Exposure Preparation Worksheet	  during this process. Step 3: Work	  out the details	  of the exposure.	  Next, we’ll plan out	  the situation. We’ll discuss the setting and the details of what	  is going to happen. Step 	  4:	  Set 	  an	  achievable	  goal. Just	  before we complete the exposure, we need to set	  an “achievable behavioral goal” so that	  we know if the exposure is a	  success. This goal should be very specific (rather than vague), at	  a	  level that	  you are likely to achieve, and observable to others. Examples of specific and non-..specific goals are provided below. Specific Goals Non-..Specific Goals Make two statements about	  myself Don’t	  get	  nervous Invite her to the dance Make a	  good impression Step 5: Complete the exposure. We will complete the exposure, and I	  will ask you to make ratings of anxiety throughout	  the exposure. We will remain in the situation as long as it	  takes for your anxiety to drop. Then we will end the exposure and review how it	  went. Step 6: Review the exposure. After the exposure is over, we will discuss how it	  went. Important	  points: • Act	  out the role play or imagined situation as completely as possible • Don’t	  break roles or stop the role play until it’s complete • Do use your script	  as a	  reminder, as needed • Don’t	  be disappointed if it’s difficult	  or doesn’t	  go well. Remember to praise yourself for effort	  not	  outcome. It	  takes repeated exposures to fully break the cycle. • If	  you avoid experiencing anxiety in exposures, it	  may help in the short	  run, but	  it	  will maintain you anxiety in the long run. (Modified from Hope et	  al., 2000) Sample	  Exposure Preparation	  Worksheet Date: Exposure task/situation:___ Raising	  hand	  to	  speak	  in	  class_________ List	  at	  least	  three 	  automatic 	  thoughts	  that	  you	  anticipate 	  having	  during	  the	  exposure: I’m going	  to pass	  out The other student are going	  to laugh at me I’ll say something	  stupid Identify the thinking errors associated with those thoughts: Worst Case Scenario Forecasting Write	  down 	  the	  challenges	  to 	  those	  automatic	  thoughts:	  Do I know for certain that I’ll say something	  stupid or others will laugh at me? Have I ever passed out before? What evidence do I have that I’m going	  to pass	  out? If students	  laugh, is	  that really the end of the world? Do other people make mistakes? Write	  down 	  the	  rationale	  responses	  that 	  you 	  will 	  use	  during	  the exposure: It’s	  never happened before. If I use my breathing, I can calm down. People make mistakes. I know my close friends	  won’t laugh at me I’ve studied this. I can at least say something	  close to what the teacher wants People make mistakes	  all the time Which skills will you use to reduce anxiety: Deep breathing	  and my rational responses What 	  are	  your	  goals	  for	  this	  exposure? Raise my hand to answer at least 2 questions Use deep breathing	  if my anxiety starts	  to spike What 	  is	  your	  anxiety 	  rating	  prediction? How high do you think	  your anxiety get? 50 Complete	  after	  exposure: Did 	  you 	  reach 	  your	  goals?	  	  Why 	  or	  why 	  not. Yes,	  I	  answered	  at	  least	  2	  questionsand	  used	  deep	  breathing	  Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Exposure	  Preparation Worksheet Date: Exposure task/situation:____________________________________ List	  at	  least	  three 	  automatic 	  thoughts	  that	  you	  anticipate 	  having	  during	  the	  exposure: Identify the thinking errors associated with those thoughts: Write	  down 	  the	  challenges	  to 	  those	  automatic	  thoughts:	  Write	  down 	  the	  rationale	  responses	  that 	  you will 	  use	  during	  the	  exposure: Which skills will you use to reduce anxiety: What 	  are	  your	  goals	  for	  this 	  exposure? What is your anxiety rating prediction? How high do you think	  your anxiety get? Complete	  after	  exposure.	  Did 	  you 	  reach 	  your	  goals?	  	  Why 	  or	  why 	  not. _______________________________________________________ ___(Modified from Hope et	  al., 2000) Date: ________________ School: _______________ Student Initials: ______________ Exposure	  Worksheet Date: Student	  initials:	  School:	  Exposure task/situation: Rating on Fear Hierarchy: Is the Exposure Preparation Worksheet complete (circle one)? Yes	  No If no, complete that	  worksheet	  before proceeding Exposure 	  Start	  Time:	   Rating (0-..100)  Anxiety Rating 1 When exposure	  begins  Anxiety Rating 2  Anxiety Rating 3  Anxiety Rating 4  Anxiety Rating 5  Anxiety Rating 6  Anxiety Rating 7  Anxiety Rating 8  Anxiety Rating 9  Anxiety Rating 10  Exposure 	  End	  Time:	   Comments:	  