13 Managing Negative Thoughts, Part 2 Positive Imagery, Self-Talk, Thought  Stopping, and Thought Acceptance Maria Loades, Sarah Clark, and Shirley Reynolds Introduction Intrusive negative thoughts play a core part in maintaining and exacerbating children’s fears and their difficulties with low mood. A range of strategies have been developed that can be used with children and young people to help them iden.tify, manage, or reduce their negative thoughts. Children’s cognitive development is highly variable and individual; therefore therapists may need to try a range of strat.egies with each child before finding the one that works best for the individual child or young person (see Chapter 5 for more details on development). In addition, these strategies are likely to be much more useful and engaging if they are adapted to suit the individual needs and interests of each child. In this chapter we describe four different specific CBT techniques, drawn from Sburlati, Schniering Lyneham and Rapee (2011), that are designed to help children overcome or tackle their negative thoughts. We also provide examples of each strategy being used. These examples are offered in order to illustrate the techniques, help clinicians relate them to clinical work, and establish a basis for the creative adaptation of these techniques to each client’s specific circumstances and needs. In order to illustrate the use of the techniques described, we will present the following two cases: 1. Katie is a 9-year-old girl with separation anxiety. She is unable to sleep in her own room at night because she is afraid that that a burglar will break in and attack her and her parents. Therefore she insists on sleeping in her parents’ room and cannot go for sleepovers at friends’ houses. Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 2. Francis is a 16-year-old boy with depression and low self-esteem. He has little moti.vation for social events and friendships and sees himself as worthless and useless. Francis lives with his mother, who is a hotel manager, and with his 18-year-old brother, who is just about to leave home to study medicine. Positive Imagery Key features of the competency The images that go through our minds are a key part of our cognitive architecture. They can be brought to mind deliberately, for example when we try to remember a happy event (such as a birthday party or a holiday), or they can come to mind unin.tentionally. Although we are sometimes unaware of their occurring, images can capture key emotions, memories, and beliefs and have a powerful impact on our mood and well-being. Images are often visual but can consist of (or include) sounds, smells, and movements. Fear is often linked to strong and powerful images that, for many people, evoke more emotional content than verbal descriptions of their fears. Therefore, if therapists do not access their client’s images, they may miss their most significant thoughts. To illustrate, compare the image of a dog that a child who fears dogs might entertain with the image of a dog that is likely to be generated by a child who does not have a fear of dogs. These contrasting images are likely to include movement (say, tail wagging or biting) and sound (growling or barking) in addition to visual elements related to the dog’s size, color, and shape. Similarly, a child fright.ened of needles and injections may associate these objects with visual images of frightening places (hospitals) and people (doctors and nurses), of themselves or their parents in pain or distress, or of the needle or injection itself. Because our mental images have a powerful impact on emotions, they can be a useful tool for attenuating emotional distress. In therapy, positive images can be used in two ways. First, the therapist can work with his/her client to transform negative, unhelpful images – for example, an image of a scary monster under the bed – into positive or benign images – for example, a friendly cartoon character (Deblinger and Heflin 1996). Second, the therapist can work with his/her client to create new positive images – for instance, an image of the self as successful and competent – in order to help that client counteract his/her key psychological difficulties – for example, to replace negative images and beliefs about the self as useless. Therefore, rather than trying to eliminate negative images directly, therapy tends to build and develop new positive images that may replace them. Clients do not always describe their images spontaneously, but therapists can elicit them. Standard cognitive techniques (see Chapter 12) can be adapted so as to include questions targeted specifically at eliciting imagery (Hackmann, Bennett-Levy, and Holmes 2011). The following excerpt from a session with Katie illustrates this procedure: THERAPIST: So when you heard a noise that evening, what went through your mind in that moment? KATIE: Ummm, I thought it was a burglar. THERAPIST: Ok, so you thought it was a burglar making the noise. Was there a picture of that in your mind? KATIE: Ummm, I’m not sure. Like what do you mean? THERAPIST: Like could you paint me a picture, using words, of what you thought was happening when you heard that noise. KATIE: Well, I thought … that the burglar was outside, trying to open the front door. Such questions can be followed by further questioning designed to explore the imagery more closely. This questioning can focus on physical features of a visual image (“What/whom else can you see there?” or “What color are her shoes?”). THERAPIST: Mmmhmm … can you tell me what the burglar looked like in your mind? KATIE: Yeah, he was like a really big man, wearing all black clothes, with a big axe in  his hand. Depending on the child’s age and developmental level, it may be appropriate for the image to be drawn by the young person (see Figure 13.1 for an example). The focusing questions can then be developed further, so that more of the emotional content emerges: THERAPIST: What did you think was going to happen next? KATIE: Ummm, I thought that he was going to break through the window. THERAPIST: Ok, so you thought he would break through the window, and then? KATIE: Then he would come running into the house … THERAPIST: Gosh! How did that picture in your mind make you feel? KATIE: Well … scared and worried. THERAPIST: It does sound like a really scary picture to have in your mind. What did it make you do? KATIE: I had to check if mum and dad were ok, and wanted to be close by them. I asked dad to check if the door was locked. When the image has been described, the therapist can then help the young person explore what it means. THERAPIST: Ok, Katie, so when you have that scary picture in your mind of that big man with the axe, what does it make you think about: yourself or other people? KATIE: Ummm … I’m not really sure … THERAPIST: Well, if I had a scary picture in my head, I might start to worry about myself, or I might start to worry about other people, or both. Does that happen for you? KATIE: Oh, I worry about mum and dad, and me, and that we’ll get hurt. That’s why I always stay near to them. THERAPIST: Ok, so that picture in your mind makes you worry about yourself and mum and dad getting hurt. Once the image has been elicited and its impact understood, rather than proceeding to challenge it, the next step is to collaboratively develop a transformation of the image, on the basis of what would have to change within the image for it to be less distressing. THERAPIST: So this really scary picture in your mind, Katie, what do you think would have to change to make it less scary for you? KATIE: Ummm, I don’t know. THERAPIST: If we could change the story that comes up in your mind when you hear those scary noises at night, what would be a story that wouldn’t be scary for you? KATIE: Well, mum once told me that there are lots of animals around in the night and that they make lots of noises, so maybe a story about the animals? THERAPIST: What kind of animals do you think move around in your garden at night? KATIE: I think that there was a hedgehog once … THERAPIST: Ok, so we could make a story about a hedgehog…what do you think this hedgehog would be up to in the night? The final step is to introduce this transformation into the image (which could be done creatively, through role-play or drawing; see, e.g., Figure 13.2) and then rehearse the re-scripted image. Figure 13.2 Transformed image of the night-time “intruder.” © Christopher Jacobs. Reproduced with permission. Transforming the frightening image is a process similar to cognitive restructuring (Chapter 12), although it focuses on nonverbal content and, rather than identi.fying evidence for and against the image content, the process concentrates on devel.oping and elaborating a new image that is less distressing. The new image need not be realistic, provided that it feels helpful, gives a sense of control over the negative imagery, promotes image acceptance, and enables the client, rather than dismissing it, to “play” it through, mentally, past the worst point, facilitating a sense of resolution. Positive images can also be developed in the absence of negative imagery. This can be useful for managing negative affective states, for reducing negative affect (for instance by inducing relaxation, which is a low negative state), and for promoting self-compassion and/or a sense of self-efficacy. For example, Gilbert (2009) has intro.duced the concept of self-compassion as a helpful way of countering self-criticism and feelings of isolation. In the session, the young person is encouraged to bring to mind a real or an imaginary character who personifies compassion and nurturing. This task involves brainstorming the qualities of an “ideal” nurturer, focusing on fostering feelings of warmth, acceptance, and compassion, then generating an image of what this figure would look like – its physical features and facial expression, its sensory characteristics (e.g., tone of voice, smell), its knowledge or wisdom – and finally exploring what being close to that figure would feel like. The compassionate character may be given a name or identity. In subsequent sessions the young person is encouraged to bring the compassionate image to mind and to focus on positive emotions that are associated with the image – such as warmth, safeness, and soothing (Lee 2005). When the image has been developed in therapy sessions, the young person is encouraged to bring it to mind outside sessions, when (s)he has a negative automatic thought or experiences distress. Imagery can also be used to develop positive feelings about the self and the future. An example would be helping the young person develop a positive image of the self that the young person has not yet become. In such cases the image represents a positive self-image, which can be brought to mind and used in interpersonal problem-solving situations. The following extract illustrates how this technique was used successfully with Francis: THERAPIST: Ok, Francis, we are going to do an imagery exercise now. Ideally, it would be good if you could keep your eyes closed throughout the exercise. But, if you don’t want to close your eyes, then maybe you could pick a spot on the wall opposite you to stare at. FRANCIS: Ok. [closes his eyes] THERAPIST: Are you ready to begin? FRANCIS: Yep. [nods] THERAPIST: Ok Francis, while you are sitting there with your eyes closed, I would like you to imagine a TV screen in front of you. On this screen, I would like you to place an image – a picture of your future most developed self. Let me explain. This is a picture of yourself that you have not yet become. This is you. This future self has all the knowledge, coping, and experience necessary in life, to be fully in charge of himself in his life, and able to choose what he wants and how he wants to live his life. FRANCIS: Mmmm, ok … I’m not sure I know what you mean … THERAPIST: Like yourself as you most want to be in the future, yourself at your peak. FRANCIS: Oh, I think I get it now. THERAPIST: Ok, Francis, I’ll give you a few minutes to think, so let me know when you have a picture on your screen of your future most developed self, yourself at your peak. [pause] FRANCIS: Mmm, I think I have it. THERAPIST: Great, excellent. Now, let’s spend a little time building this up into a clearer picture of your future most developed self. THERAPIST: Tell me, what do you notice about your future, most developed self that is possibly different from how you are today? Is he doing anything? Standing? Sitting? FRANCIS: I can see me but older, maybe 25. Sitting down. THERAPIST: Ok, great, let’s see if we can add in some more details. What is his hair like? FRANCIS: Kind of short and neat, shorter than now. THERAPIST: And his face? FRANCIS: Well, like now but his skin is way better, no spots! THERAPIST: What is your future most developed self wearing on his top half? FRANCIS: Like a button up shirt. THERAPIST: What color? FRANCIS: It’s like a blue color, pale blue. THERAPIST: Buttoned up to the top? FRANCIS: Mmmm … top button open, like casual. Sleeves rolled up too. THERAPIST: Ok, great, what is your future most developed self wearing on his bottom half? FRANCIS: Ummmm … like jeans I think. Now that the therapist has developed the physical image, she starts to move onto ques.tions to explore the emotional state of the future most developed self (FMDS) image. THERAPIST: Now Francis, take a look at his face. What expression can you see? FRANCIS: Yeah … He looks happy, and quite chilled, I think … THERAPIST: So he looks happy, chilled. How does your future most developed self feel? FRANCIS: Ummm … this is tricky … THERAPIST: You’re doing a great job so far. How do you think he feels? FRANCIS: I think he feels happy and in control. THERAPIST: Ok, so happy and in control. What tells you this? How can you see it? FRANCIS: Well, he’s like sitting back in the chair, his body looks relaxed, and he looks healthy, tanned and toned. Having explored the emotional state of the FMDS image, the therapist continues to develop the image by exploring the relationships of the FMDS to self and others. THERAPIST: Great, Francis. And how does your future most developed self feel toward others? FRANCIS: Ummm, he gets on well with everyone. Is that what you mean? THERAPIST: You got it. And how do others feel toward your future most developed self? FRANCIS: Yeah, I think most people get on well with him and feel positive toward him. THERAPIST: I wonder how your future most developed self feels toward himself? FRANCIS: Mmmm, I think he is happy with himself, I think he likes himself, but not too much. [little laugh] THERAPIST: What tells you that from what you can see? FRANCIS: Just that he seems to be happy being himself. The therapist now moves on to summarizing the FMDS image that has been created. THERAPIST: Now, using the information that you have given me, I’m going to try to pull together what you’ve described. Let me know if I have missed anything out or if there is anything else that needs adding, okay? FRANCIS: Mmmmhmmm. [nods] THERAPIST: So your future most developed self is yourself, in your mid-20s, wearing a pale blue button-up shirt, slightly open at the neck, and jeans. With good skin, tanned and a toned body, short and neat hair. Your future most developed self feels happy and relaxed, contented. He likes himself, but not too much, and gets on well with other people. After checking out with Francis whether this is an accurate summary and whether he wants to add anything more to the image, the stage of image creation is completed, and the therapist moves on to use the image for problem-solving. THERAPIST: Ok, Francis, what I’m going to ask you next is to just step inside your future most developed self. I can’t tell you how to do that, as each person will have his or her own way of doing it. But, once you are there, simply be in his body, looking out of his eyes and seeing what it feels like to be there. Let me know when you are there. [pause] FRANCIS: I’m there. THERAPIST: Excellent! Now, Francis, it’s your job to be inside your future most developed self, looking out of his eyes and seeing what it feels like to be there. FRANCIS: Ok. THERAPIST: In a moment, we will revisit and re-run the problem situation that you chose to focus on today. This time, we will be watching and seeing how your future most developed self handles it and what it feels like for him. You are simply along for the ride, like an observer. FRANCIS: Ok. THERAPIST: So Francis, in your own time, simply re-run the scene right from its beginning through to its natural completion and then let me know when it is complete. Finally, the therapist asks Francis to open his eyes, and he explores how the FMDS coped with the problem scenario, what the FMDS did that was different from what Francis himself did, and how this made the FMDS feel. Thus this image can be used to help the young person to take another perspective on the situation and, using his/ her life values and what (s)he aspires to be, to develop his/her problem-solving ability. Competence in treating anxiety disorders and depression In treating anxiety disorders in children and young people, the focus of positive imagery is most likely to be on: 1. transforming (de-catastrophizing) images linked to catastrophic thoughts about perceived danger (e.g., as we described above, an image of a burglar trying to break in, triggered by hearing a noise at night, could be transformed into an image of lots of nocturnal creatures going about their business); 2. developing a sense of ability to cope (e.g., teaching children to use their imagina.tion to pretend that they have special powers that will help them to face the danger or perceived danger); this reduces anxiety by increasing the client’s sense of self-efficacy; 3. inducing physiological relaxation via bringing to mind an image that is relaxing or enjoyable and thus lowers arousal levels (e.g., creating the image of playing in a place that the child finds relaxing: playing on the beach, with one’s family, hearing the waves breaking on the sand, feeling the sun shining on one’s back and the sand between one’s toes…). In treating depression, the focus of positive imagery is more likely to be on: 1. developing self-compassion as a means to counter self-critical thinking (e.g., creating a compassionate, nurturing figure, based on reality or entirely imagined, which can be brought to mind when the client recognizes that (s)he is being self-critical or is in distress, to help soothe and comfort the client, in his/her mind, in a com.passionate way); 2. developing images of successful future performance, to counter hopelessness and apathy and to build self-confidence and motivation (e.g., generating images of interacting successfully in a social situation, such as a party). Competence in treating both children and adolescents Most young children are familiar with imaginary play, which develops naturally in early childhood. Younger children tend to approach imaginary tasks very directly (as compared to adults, who need to be more explicitly taught to use imagination), perhaps because they use imagination naturally in their daily lives (Ronen 1997). For example, a child who is afraid that a monster or a wild animal will enter their bed at night can be taught to draw a sword for protection; and this is likely to be much more effective than explaining that monsters or wild animals are very unlikely to be found in one’s bedroom. What is critical to engaging children in harnessing their imagination successfully within therapeutic work is the language used and the expla.nations given, which should be at a developmentally appropriate level. The rationale behind introducing new imagined material is a fairly complex cognitive concept, which younger children may struggle to follow, and some imagery exercises (e.g., developing an FMDS) require sophisticated metacognitive skills. However, younger children tend to respond well to the idea of pictures or “movies” in the mind and, provided that appropriate adaptations are made in terms of the ways in which positive imagery techniques are introduced, such pictures can be used to good effect with children and young people. Particularly important is the way in which imagery is labeled and framed for the young person. This can help maximize the chance of their developing and using new images in a deliberate way in order to deal with difficulties. For example, a “com.passionate creature” may be a more appropriate and accessible way to describe the compassionate nurturer concept outlined above when working with younger children (like Katie), while an older adolescent (like Francis) might prefer the more adult terms “compassionate figure” or “compassionate nurturer.” With children and young people, eliciting negative imagery potentially raises con.cerns or questions about the client’s safety or exposure to possible risks. The therapist needs to judge if the imagery is grounded in any real risk to the child or young person. To do so, (s)he will need to use other information about the child’s wider context and to make an assessment on the basis of his/her own clinical judgment, therapy super.vision, and relevant service guidelines. Common obstacles to competent practice and ways to overcome them Possibly the most common obstacle to using imagery effectively is not giving it enough time and attention. It is important to explore negative images with the child or young person and to help him/her develop and transform them, as well as develop and practice positive imagery. Imagery can encompass night-time imagery such as nightmares, which can be effectively addressed by using the approach outlined above for dealing with and re-scripting negative imagery (Hackmann et al. 2011). With imagery, it is important to engage a number of sensory modalities – not just what the person can see, but also what (s)he can hear, feel, and smell and what feelings this evokes in him/her. Imagery is most successful when a vivid image is created and rehearsed, so that it becomes accessible to the client even when his/her arousal or distress levels are high. Self-Talk Key features of the competency Vygotsky’s (1962) seminal work highlighted the critical role of internalizing verbal commands in establishing voluntary control over one’s own actions. In CBT, the specific CBT technique of self-talk – also known as “thought substitution” – focuses on changing what people say to themselves and is premised on the belief that behavior follows directly from this self-talk. Self-talk involves the use of short enabling state.ments that the client repeats to him-/herself during periods of distress. The statement counters his/her negative automatic thoughts and, through repetition, focuses his/ her attention away from the negative thoughts and undermines them, without the client’s using the explicit methods of evaluating and challenging negative thoughts that are characteristic of cognitive restructuring (Stallard 2009). The use of self-talk with children and young people can be quite directive – that is, the therapist tells the client what to do or say – or it can be collaborative – in other words self-talk can be taught as a skill (Ronen 1997). The collaborative approach is more consistent with the collaborative stance of CBT. However, no matter how it is carried out, self-talk needs to be realistic and believable rather than simply a positive statement (Kendall and Hedke 2006; Rapee et al. 2006). For example, for an anxious child such as Katie, the self-statement “I’m afraid, but I can cope” is much more real.istic and believable than “it’s OK, I’m fine.” Competence in treating the anxiety disorders and depression With children who are anxious, focused self-talk is most useful in preparation for, rather than during, anxiety-provoking situations. Anxious children tend to experi.ence high rates of negative thoughts when they anticipate the situations they fear. The treatment of anxiety using CBT frequently involves the child or young person deliberately exposing him-/herself to things that (s)he is frightened of and this, not surprisingly, leads to high levels of anticipatory fear. Self-talk can be used to tackle distressing anticipatory anxiety in the lead-up to exposure exercises. For example, in treatment, Katie might be encouraged to replace anticipatory negative anxiety-increasing thoughts (say, the thought “I can’t cope with being frightened when I’m on my own in bed”) with more positive, anxiety-reducing self-talk (such as “I might be a bit frightened but I can manage it and stay in my own bed”). Such cognitions emphasize how the child will cope with feeling anxious, rather than getting rid of, or avoiding, anxiety and worry. This can help the child to feel more self-confident and encourage him/her to face his/her worries or fears rather than to escape or avoid them (Stallard 2002). Self-talk for children with anxiety can be a useful part of the overall anxiety management strategy; for example, Kendall and Hedtke’s Coping Cat 16-session treatment program for anxious children (2006b, p. 37) uses the FEAR acronym to prompt the child to a four-step coping process. In this acronym,  F stands for “feeling frightened” (i.e., developing awareness of physiological cues to identify anxiety and learning to relax);  E represents “expecting bad things to happen?” (i.e., identifying unhelpful thoughts and self-talk);  A is for “attitudes and actions that can help” (i.e., positive self-talk and problem-solving); and  R stands for “results and rewards” (i.e., facing fears, self-evaluation, managing failure). Similarly, children who are depressed can be supported to replace anticipatory cogni.tions that predict failure (such as “I will fail this test”) with more helpful self-talk such as (“I will do my best”). Furthermore, positive self-talk (as compared to coping self-talk) can also help children who are depressed to notice and celebrate their achievements. For example, in response to Francis’s negative automatic thought “I’m no good at anything and will fail this test,” positive self-talk could be developed – for instance “all I can do is to try my best.” This is useful in eroding all-or-nothing thinking patterns by helping children to develop more flexible and less negative predictions (Stallard 2002). Competence in treating both children and adolescents Self-talk does not require complex or advanced thinking skills; for this reason it may be particularly helpful for younger children or children with a cognitive delay. The use of self-talk can help reduce avoidance and anticipatory anxiety as well as to develop confidence and self-esteem. Children’s use of self-talk is more likely to be successful if parents, teachers, and therapists encourage children to use self-talk in real situations, recognize when they have used it, and reinforce their positive self-talk and associated behaviors through comments such as: “It’s great that you had a go at sleeping on your own”; “Well done for having a go at that.” Self-talk can be developed creatively; Friedberg and McClure (2002) suggested a trea.sure-chest metaphor to promote the use of self-talk in children. They made an analogy between forgotten or misplaced coping thoughts and lost treasure. The child is supported to draw or construct a treasure chest during therapy sessions and to develop new positive self-coping statements (which are his/her “loot”) to go in the chest. The child is then taught to go to the chest and pull out his/her positive “loot” whenever (s)he feels low. Common obstacles to competent practice and ways to overcome them When developing self-talk with a child or young person, it is important to engage the parents. Some children prefer to use self-talk out loud, and this can worry parents if they are not forewarned. Parents can also help their child develop self-talk strategies in new situations and encourage them when they use self-talk in real situations outside the therapy room. It is important that they praise the child for his/her attempts to face his/ her fears – that is, for his/her efforts – rather than for success in facing these fears. Parents can also engage the child’s teachers to explain the use of self-talk in the classroom. The development of a child’s skills of positive self-talk will take time. It is common that the child would not believe the self-talk statements at first. However, (s)he should be encouraged to continue to practice and develop his/her self-talk. The child’s natural tendency toward negative beliefs (“I can’t do it!”) will be strong, particularly when the child is in a feared situation. Overcoming this tendency will therefore require regular practice and support, initially outside of, as well as within, trigger situations, and it is important that any attempts to use self-talk are reinforced. For children and young people who find it difficult to think of helpful self-talk to develop, Vivyan (2009) has produced a helpful list of “positive affirmations,” which may give the young person (or at least the therapist) some ideas of possible starting points in the development of one’s own idiosyncratic self-talk. Thought Stopping Key features of the competency Thought stopping, a specific CBT technique also known as “thought suppression” or “thought interruption,” is a process of intentionally trying to stop thinking certain thoughts. Thought stopping is premised on recognizing the occurrence of negative or unhelpful thoughts, and then breaking the cycle of negative thinking. It can be used as a distraction technique, in which it is first necessary to identify a positive thought or image (like a holiday experience). The client is then instructed to notice negative thoughts as they arise and, each time (s)he notices a negative thought, (s)he is asked to instruct him-/herself to “stop” and switch his/her thinking to the positive thought or image (Verduyn, Rogers, and Wood 2009). Stallard (2002, p. 115) suggests that thought stopping is like changing the tape inside your head and learning “how to turn the tape off.” He suggests the following steps:  Notice the negative thought.  Immediately say “stop.”  This can be emphasized by “banging the table, or holding a chair or table tightly” (Stallard 2002, p. 105).  Remind yourself of a more positive or balanced thought in response to this nega.tive thought (this could be developed and agreed upon in collaboration with the therapist in the form of self-talk) and say it loudly. An alternative method, also suggested by Stallard (2002), is to pair negative thoughts with a mildly aversive experience (e.g., snapping an elastic band against one’s wrist) while saying “stop.” Competence in treating anxiety disorders and depression In anxiety disorders the patterns of negative automatic thoughts tend to be about events in the future. Further, by definition, our anxiety system promotes survival. It is therefore very difficult to override anxiety by simply instructing your brain to “stop.” What may be more effective is catching the anxious thoughts (worries) and putting them to one side, for consideration within a problem-solving framework, during ded.icated worry time (Clarke, Lewinsohn, and Hops 1990). Thus, rather than trying to dismiss or ignore the intrusive negative thoughts, one should treat them as important and validated; but one should set them aside so as not to allow them to interrupt daily living constantly. In depression, the patterns of negative automatic thoughts tend to be ruminative, going over past events. Conceptually this mechanism has less survival value; in consequence it may be easier to override the pattern through thought stopping. Competence in treating both children and adolescents Thought stopping may be useful with younger or less cognitively able clients – such as Katie, who could be instructed to imagine pressing “stop” on the tape in her head that begins to play a story about danger at night-time. Alternatively, with younger children, it may be helpful to introduce a worry box into which they can post their worries, for discussion with an adult at a pre-arranged time. Common obstacles to competent practice and ways to overcome them Despite the inclusion of the thought-stopping technique in empirically supported treatment manuals, significant concerns have been raised about the use of thought stopping as a cognitive technique. Wegner, Schneider, Carter, and White (1987) observed that research participants who were instructed not to think about a “White Bear” reported significantly higher White Bear intrusions than participants who were not given the thought-stopping instruction. Thus intentional thought stopping may have paradoxical impacts and increase the frequency of negative thoughts. In a review of the literature with clinical participants, Aldao, Nolen-Hoeksema, and Schweizer (2010) reported that attempts to avoid, suppress, or neutralize thoughts resulted in their returning more strongly than before. Thought suppression strategies were also associated with greater anxiety and depression. The paradoxical effect of thought stopping or suppression is imperfectly understood. However, because of the potential negative effects of thought stopping, many clinicians advise that it is better to ignore negative and unhelpful thoughts or to accept them and move on, rather than to try to simply stop or suppress them (see, e.g., Marcks and Woods 2005). Thought Acceptance Key features of the competency Thought acceptance contrasts with thought-stopping strategies in the way described above. Thought acceptance can be defined as the ability to see thoughts as thoughts or opinions, not as facts. Thought acceptance as a therapeutic strategy involves allowing intrusive thoughts simply to “be” in the mind. Thus, rather than engaging and interacting with his/her negative and unhelpful thoughts, the individual develops a strategy of non-attachment to the thoughts and in this way alters his/her relationship with those thoughts. Thought acceptance can be achieved by developing the skill of mindfulness. Mindfulness has three interdependent elements (Germer 2005, pp. 6–7): 1. awareness (i.e., stopping and observing sensations, thoughts, and feelings and re-orienting attention) 2. of the present moment, 3. with acceptance (i.e., so as “to receive our experience without judgment or preference, with curiosity and kindness”). In other words, mindfulness involves paying attention in a specific way. Mindfulness can be developed by using focused exercises that are based on principles of meditation. This can be a lengthy process, but young people can be helped to develop mindfulness skills without full training in mindfulness meditation (Bögels, de Bruin, and van der Oord 2013). Developing mindfulness can help the young person to recognize his/her habitual or automatic responses to events, and thus it gives him/her the opportunity to choose to respond differently. For example, a young person might recognize a negative automatic thought such as “I’m going to mess this up.” The use of mindfulness would allow this person to notice that intrusive thought as a thought, not a fact, and to observe it dispassionately. This mindful response would replace the person’s habitual response, which is to tend to elaborate on the negative thought and to catastrophize about it. The use of mindfulness techniques to deal with intrusive thoughts can help young people recognize that their thoughts need not be accorded importance, significance, or power (Verduyn et al. 2009). Competence in treating anxiety disorders and depression Thought acceptance and the awareness that thoughts are not facts can help make individuals distance from their intrusive and repetitive negative schemata (Mason and Hargreaves 2001). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) has been used to reduce relapse in adults with recurrent depression (Kuyken et al. 2008). Thought acceptance has also been advocated for use in anxiety disorders such as obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) (March and Mulle 1998). Intrusive negative thoughts are common in this population (Berry and Laskey 2012). However, people who have OCD attribute particular significance to normal intrusive thoughts and interpret them as indicating danger or risk, either to themselves or to their loved ones. This belief then leads to distress and anxiety, and people with OCD typically develop rituals and repetitive behaviors that are designed to prevent danger and harm. By cultivating thought acceptance, the young person can learn to allow his/ her intrusive thoughts to pass through his/her mind without interacting with them or attributing meaning to them; thus the young person can break the cycle of OCD. Competence in treating both children and adolescents Within the safety of therapy and of the therapeutic alliance, young people may be encouraged to take risks and to experiment with their negative intrusive thoughts by dealing with them differently. The therapist needs to validate the power of his/her client’s negative intrusive thoughts to create distress. In addition, therapy provides a safe place for young people to explore the potential effect of leaving their trouble.some, intrusive thoughts alone while they carry on with their lives – instead of responding to these thoughts or trying to push them away. Behavioral experiments (see Chapter 12) can be useful in this respect: they help young people explore the effect of engaging with the troublesome thoughts versus accepting them, noticing that they are there, and carrying on with life. A number of useful metaphors can be used to convey this idea: 1. The “rude guest”: here an analogy is drawn between intrusive thoughts and a rude guest who visits the family home without being asked and says lots of annoying and rude things. The child is asked to think about how they would handle this guest. They may suggest arguing (to which the rude guest responds by arguing back more loudly); throwing the guest out (which the guest resists and tries to come back in); or ignoring the guest until the guest gets bored and leaves. The child is then asked how this guest is similar to his/her intrusive thoughts, and what the best way to deal with intrusive thoughts that come into his/her mind uninvited might be; and the take-home message is “leave thoughts alone and let them come into your mind when they want to” (Atkinson 2009, p. 87). 2. The “nasty parrot,” which repeats phrases it has learned without any understanding of their meaning. The nasty parrot has only learned the unhelpful, negative, and critical phrases that the child experiences as intrusive thoughts (e.g. “You’re rubbish,” “They won’t like you,” “You’re a failure”) and repeats them over and over. The child is asked to imagine the parrot coming to live with him/her, how long (s)he would tolerate this abuse before ignoring the parrot, and what would happen if (s)he did ignore the parrot (it would get louder, to try to get attention, but if it was ignored for long enough, it would give up). The child is then asked how this is similar to his/her negative thoughts; and the concept of thought acceptance is conveyed through the metaphor of ignoring (e.g., by throwing a towel over its cage) rather than listening to the parrot (Vivyan 2010). 3. Turning down the volume: rather than listening to the constant negative tracks, the album selection can be replaced with something more balanced. In practice, this could involve establishing the means by which the child or young person listens to music (e.g. iPod, MP3 player, CD player) and asking him/her to describe this device in as much detail as possible: what it looks like, where the controls are, how to switch it on and off, how to change tracks and albums, and how to adjust the volume. The negative-thought tracks or albums can then be manipulated by the young person as (s)he imagines him-/herself turning the volume up and down, switching off the device, turning it back on again, changing the album or track selection, and so on. Common obstacles to competent practice and ways to overcome them The idea of thought acceptance requires the young person to be able to stand back from his/her own thoughts and to gain some distance from them. This skill demands quite developed metacognitive abilities and therefore is likely to be more useful with teenagers than with younger children. Thought acceptance is most likely to be useful with intrusive thoughts that are destructive, ruminative, self-referential, and under.mining. These thoughts are likely to be self-generated and self-defeating and to get in the way of the young person’s development and life goals. It is important to help the young person understand that not engaging with, or paying attention to, negative thoughts about the self does not mean that one should accept negative events and circumstances in one’s life. Rather the emphasis of accept.ing and letting go of negative intrusive thoughts is to make room for engagement in more active, goal-oriented behaviors and plans. Thus it is important that thought acceptance is promoted in a way that explicitly balances acceptance with action and positive future goals, for example through the development of the image of the positive and most developed self (see above). Conclusion Successfully engaging children and young people with the cognitive elements of CBT draws on a wide range of therapeutic skills and knowledge. We have outlined a range of strategies that can be used to help children and young people recognize, challenge, and manage their negative thoughts. Therapists will typically find some strategies more appealing than others, and individual children and young people are also likely to engage with some strategies in preference to others. We would tend to favor behavioral experiments (see Chapter 12) as a core strategy to bring about cognitive change, and to use the other strategies to support and expand on behavioral experiments. Behavioral experiments provide immediate and powerful learning experiences, which can feel more “real” than pure cognitive work: such work may appear to take a more abstract or theoretical approach to change. Blending behavioral experiments and other cognitive strategies to help children overcome anxiety and low mood builds on a core therapeutic relationship. A strong therapeutic alliance with the child and his/her family provides a safe environment to introduce behavioral experiments and other interventions (see Chapter 6 for details on building a therapeutic alliance). Thus CBT relies on the basic therapy skills of warmth and empathy, which in turn provide the foundation for a positive therapeutic alliance with the child and his/her family. Therapists must be able to adapt their style and method of work to the needs and characteristics of each child and family. These include age and developmental level of the child, parental beliefs and mental health, the family’s immediate social and cultural environment (e.g. class, religious beliefs, and language) and the wider environmental norms and expectations on children and their families. Ideally the child’s wider environment at home and at school will support and encourage therapeutic work outside and beyond sessions; hence involving the parents and sometimes the teachers is gener.ally recommended. These various complexities of using CBT with children and young people mean that therapists require high levels of therapist skills, knowledge, and personal qualities. Like any form of psychotherapy, the delivery of CBT makes significant emotional and cognitive demands on therapists. Therefore in our view all CBT therapists, whether experienced or not, should receive regular and focused CBT supervision. In our view, supervision for CBT therapists working with children, young people, and their families should include direct or indirect observation of treatment sessions. In addition, super.vision should focus on the development and maintenance of the therapeutic alliance as well as on the use of specific CBT techniques. Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Christopher Jacobs for Figures 13.1 and 13.2. References Aldao, Amelia, Susan Nolen-Hoeksema, and Susanne Schweizer. 2010. “Emotion-Regulation Strategies across Psychopathology: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Clinical Psychology Review, 30: 217–37. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.11.004 Atkinson, Linda J. 2009. “CBT with younger children.” In Polly Waite and Tim Williams (Eds.). Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with children and young people (pp. 77–96). London: Routledge. Berry, Lisa-Marie, and Benjamin Laskey. 2012. “A Review of Obsessive Intrusive Thoughts in the General Population.” Journal of Obsessive–Compulsive and Related Disorders, 1: 125–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.jocrd.2012.02.002 Bögels, Susan M., Esther I. de Bruin, and Saskia van der Oord. 2013. “Mindfulness Inter.ventions in Child and Adolescent Psychopathology.” In Philip Graham and Shirley Reynolds (Eds.), Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Children and Families: Current Trends (pp. 371–84). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Clarke, Gregory, Peter M. Lewinsohn, and Hyman Hops. 1990. Leader’s Manual for Adolescent Groups: Coping with Depression Course. Portland, OR: Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research. Deblinger, Esther, and Ann Heflin. 1996. Treating Sexually Abused Children and their Non-offending Parents. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Friedberg, Robert D., and Jessica M. McClure. 2002. Clinical Practice of Cognitive Therapy with Children and Adolescents: The Nuts and Bolts. London: Guildford Press. Germer, Christopher K. 2005. “Mindfulness: What Is It? What Does It Matter?” In Christopher K. Germer, Ronald D. Siegel and Paul R. Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness and Psychotherapy (pp. 3–27). New York: Guildford Press. Gilbert, Paul. 2009. “Introducing Compassion-Focused Therapy.” Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15: 199–208. DOI: 10.1192/apt.bp.107.005264 Hackmann, Ann, James Bennett-Levy, and Emily Holmes. 2011. Oxford Guide to Imagery in Cognitive Therapy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kendall, Philip C., and Kristin A. Hedke. 2006a. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Anxious Children: Therapist Manual (3rd ed.). Ardmore, PA: Workbook Publishing. Kendall, Philip C., and Kristin A. Hedtke, 2006b. The Coping Cat Workbook. Ardmore, PA: Workbook Publishing. Kuyken, Willem, Sarah Byford, Rod S. Taylor, Ed Watkins, Emily Holden, Kat White, … John D. Teasdale. 2008. “Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy to Prevent Relapse in Recurrent Depression.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76: 966–78. DOI: 10.1037/a0013786 Lee, Deborah A. 2005. “The Perfect Nurturer: A Model to Develop a Compassionate Mind within the Context of Cognitive Therapy.” In Paul Gilbert (Ed.), Compassion: Conceptu.alisations, Research and Use in Psychotherapy (pp. 326–51). London: Routledge. March, John, and Karen Mulle. 1998. OCD in Children and Adolescents: A Cognitive– Behavioural Treatment Manual. New York: Guildford Press. Marcks, Brooke A., and Douglas W. Woods. 2005. “A Comparison of Thought Suppression to an Acceptance-Based Technique in the Management of Personal Intrusive Thoughts: A Controlled Evaluation.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43: 433–45. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2004.03.005 Mason, Olivia, and Isobel Hargreaves. 2001. “A Qualitative Study of Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression.” British Journal of Medical Psychology, 74: 197–212. Rapee, Ronald M., Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, Viviana Wuthrich, Maree A. Abbot, Jennifer L. Hudson, and Ann Wignall. 2006. Cool Kids “Chilled” Adolescent Anxiety Program. Sydney: Centre for Emotional Health, Macquaire University. Ronen, Tammie (1997). Cognitive Developmental Therapy with Children. Chichester, England: Wiley. Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioural Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14: 89–109. DOI: 10.1007/s10567-011-0083-6 Stallard, Paul. (2002). Think Good – Feel Good: A Cognitive Behaviour Therapy Workbook for Children and Young People. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. Stallard, Paul. 2009. Anxiety: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with Children and Young People. London, England: Routledge. Verduyn, Chrissie, Julia Rogers, and Alison Wood. 2009. Depression: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with Children and Young People. London and New York: Routledge. Vivyan, Carol. 2009. “Affirmations,” www.getselfhelp.co.uk/affirmations.htm (accessed December 2, 2013). Vivyan, Carol. 2010. “The Poisoned Parrot,” http://www.get.gg/parrot.htm (accessed December 2, 2013). Vygotsky, Lev S. 1962. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Wegner, Daniel M., David J. Schneider, Samuel R. Carter, and Terry L. White. 1987. “Paradoxical Effects of Thought Suppression.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53: 5–13. 