1 An Introduction to the Competencies-Based Approach Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham,  and Carolyn A. Schniering The Genesis of This Book Empirically supported treatment, evidence-based practice,  and the real world There are a number of cognitive behavioral empirically supported treatments (ESTs) available for treating child and adolescent anxiety and depressive disorders that  therapists practicing in routine clinical practice (RCP) can use when delivering evidence-based practice (EBP). However, interventions for children and adolescents may not be as effective when implemented in real world RCP settings as they are when implemented in research settings (Weisz, Ugueto, Cheron, and Herren 2013). Research is now indi.cating that poor real-world implementation of ESTs could be partly due to inadequate training of the therapists who work in RCP (Beidas, Barmish, and Kendall 2009; Herschell, Kolko, Baumann, and Davis 2010). As a result, there has been a call to examine and improve the quality of therapist EST training (Rakovshik and McManus 2010). However, until recently, the specific competencies that are required for the effec.tive implementation of ESTs that target anxious and depressed children and adolescents were unknown, which made the development of more  effective EST training difficult. The competencies-based approach The field of psychology is moving away from the traditional training approach, which focused on the trainee’s satisfying training activities (e.g., courses, client contact hours, supervision hours) to a competencies-based approach to training that aims to Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. conceptualize, systematically train, and effectively assess the competence of trainees in performing as independent professionals (e.g., Hunsley and Barker 2011; Kaslow 2004; Kaslow et al. 2004; Knight 2011; Laidlaw and Gillanders 2011; Pachana, Sofronoff, Scott, and Helmes 2011; Roberts, Borden, Christiansen, and Lopez 2005). Competence is defined within the competencies-based approach as “the habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning,  emotions, values, and reflection in daily practice for the benefit of the individual and community being served” (Epstein and Hundert 2002, p. 227). The competencies-based approach suggests that competence is comprised of competencies, which are the important component parts of competence (Kaslow 2004; Kaslow et al. 2004). According to the competencies-based approach, these competencies include a therapist’s knowledge, attitudes, and skills that are related to his or her area of practice (Kaslow 2004; Kaslow et al. 2004). A model of therapist competencies for the evidence-based treatment  of child and adolescent anxiety and depressive disorders As a part of a large-scale initiative in the United Kingdom, the dissemination project Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT), Roth and Pilling (2008) developed a model of therapist competencies for the evidence-based cognitive behavioral treatment of adult anxiety and depression. This model was designed to be used so as to develop a training curriculum aimed at teaching therapists in RCP to implement evidence-based practice in real-world settings. Drawing on the work of Roth and Pilling (2008) and acknowledging the vast array of different competencies required when treating children and adolescents (as opposed to adults), Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011) developed a therapist competence model targeting the empirically supported cognitive behavioral treatment of child and adolescent anxiety and depressive disorders. This model drew on all empirically supported treatment manuals that had been published prior to January 2010 and utilized the knowledge and feedback of experts from all around the world (for a complete description of the manuals, experts, and methods used in the model development, see Sburlati et al. 2011). The outcome was a model that provides a com.prehensive listing of the individual competencies needed to conduct evidence-based prac.tice with youth experiencing internalizing disorders in real-world clinical practice. The individual competencies in the model are grouped together by similarity, into compe.tency categories, and these competency categories are placed under the three domains of competence (Sburlati et al. 2011). These three domains of competence are described below, in the part devoted to the subject. In the model, competencies were shaded gray if they were specific to the treatment of children and adolescents (but not adults) or require considerable adaptation when working with children and adolescents. (To view the model in its original format, see Sburlati et al. 2011, p. 94). Sburlati et al. (2011) domains of competence Generic therapeutic competencies Generic therapeutic competencies, first identified by Roth and Pilling (2008), are those competencies that a therapist needs in order to interact with people within a therapeutic context, irrespective of therapeutic orientation. These competencies are not seen in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) only, but rather are used across all therapeutic models (Roth and Pilling 2008). The generic therapeutic competencies were reviewed, adapted, and expanded by Sburlati and colleagues (2011) to account for the needs of children and adolescents. The competency categories and individual competencies included in the generic therapeutic competencies domain can be seen in Table 1.1. These competencies are discussed across Chapters 3 to 7 of this book. Category Individual competencies Table 1.1 Generic therapeutic competencies. 1. Practicing professionally:  (a)  knowledge of and ability to operate within  professional, ethical, and legal codes of conduct  relevant to working with children and adoles. cents, and their families (e.g., providing a duty  of care);  (b)  ability to actively participate in supervision;  (c)  possession of an open attitude toward psycho. therapy research, and the ability to access,  critically evaluate and utilize this research to  inform practice;  (d)  ability to self assess current level of competence,  and to seek relevant professional development.  2. Understanding relevant   (a)  knowledge of developmental issues including  child and adolescent  cognitive, social, and emotional maturation from  characteristics:  childhood to adolescence and how these can  impact on therapy;  (b)  knowledge of child or adolescent relevant  individual differences (e.g., learning disorders,  familial culture) and how these can impact on  therapy;  (c)  knowledge of other environmental factors  (e.g., socioeconomic status, family structure,  education) and life events (e.g., bullying, trauma,  health issues, life transitions) and how these can  impact on therapy;  (d)  knowledge of child and adolescent  psychopathology and comorbid presentations  and how these can impact on therapy.  3. Building a positive relationship:  (a)  ability to engage the child or adolescent through  age appropriate methods (e.g., games, activities,  humour, technology, language), and appropriate  session pacing;  (b)  ability to foster and maintain a good therapeutic  alliance with the child or adolescent;  (c)  ability to foster and maintain a good therapeutic  alliance with the parent;  (d)  ability to instil hope, and optimism for change.  (Continued) Category Individual competencies Table 1.1 (cont’d) 4. Conducting a thorough  (a)  ability to undertake an evidence-based, multi  assessment:  method (e.g., self-report, observational), multi  informant (e.g., child, parent, teacher, allied  health professional) psychological assessment of  the disorder presentation;  (b)  ability to integrate assessment reports from  both the child or adolescent, parent and other  parties;  (c)  ability to determine clinical diagnoses with  consideration of differential diagnosis;  (d)  ability to undertake a generic assessment of the  child or adolescent’s current functioning, family  functioning, peer relationships, developmental  history and stage, and their suitability for the  intervention;  (e)  ability to assess and manage risk of self-harm and  suicide.  Source: Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011, p. 94). CBT competencies CBT competencies are those competencies required to plan, administer, and flexibly tailor specific CBT techniques to the individual needs of the child or adolescent and his or her family (Sburlati et al. 2011). The CBT competencies domain in Sburlati and colleagues (2011) is not to be found in the Roth and Pilling (2008) model; it was derived from combining two separate Roth and Pilling (2008) competence domains – basic CBT competencies and metacompetencies. The competency categories and the individual competencies included in the CBT competencies domain can be seen in Table 1.2. These competencies are discussed across Chapters 8 to 11 of this book. Specific CBT techniques Specific CBT techniques are techniques that target the theoretical factors that main.tain anxiety and depression and that are included within empirically supported cognitive behavioral treatments for child and adolescent anxiety and depressive disor.ders (Roth and Pilling 2008; Sburlati et al. 2011). The competency categories and the individual techniques included in the specific CBT techniques domain can be seen in Table 1.3. These competencies are discussed across Chapters 12 to 19 of this book. About This Book Aims The present book calls on the expertise of many leaders in the field to explore in detail each of the competencies in Sburlati and colleagues’ (2011) model. This book is aimed at two main audiences. First, it is aimed at clinical supervisors who are Table 1.2 CBT competencies. Category  Individual competencies  5. Understanding  (a)  knowledge of theoretical underpinnings of CBT, and the ability to  relevant CBT  implement CBT in line with these;  theory and  (b)  knowledge of cognitions relevant to the maintenance of anxiety  research:  disorders and depression;  (c)  knowledge of behaviors relevant to the maintenance of anxiety  disorders and depression;  (d)  knowledge of family and other environment factors relevant to the  maintenance of anxiety disorders and depression in children and  adolescents.  6. Devising,  (a)  ability to devise and revise a CBT case formulation that appropri. implementing,  ately accounts for child or adolescent disorder presentation,  and revising a  developmental level, individual differences, family factors, and the  CBT case  presence of comorbidity;  formulation  (b)  ability to devise, implement, and flexibly revise an evidence-based  and treatment  CBT treatment plan by selecting, sequencing, and applying the  plan:  most appropriate specific CBT techniques, at the appropriate  dosage, for the case formulation;  (c)  ability to communicate appropriate psychoeducation about the  nature of the disorder, the case formulation, and the treatment plan  to both the parent and the child or adolescent;  (d)  ability to collaboratively negotiate and agree on treatment goals;  (e)  ability to use measures and self-monitoring to guide therapy and  to monitor outcome;  (f)  ability to manage obstacles to CBT;  (g)  ability to plan for the end of therapy and for long-term mainte. nance of gains after treatment.  7. Collaboratively  (a)  ability to collaboratively set and adhere to session goals/agenda;  conducting  (b)  ability to communicate rationale for each specific CBT technique;  CBT sessions:  (c)  ability to elicit and respond to feedback;  (d)  ability to implement specific CBT techniques flexibly for the client  disorder presentation, needs or preferences, cultural background,  and current mood;  (e)  ability to make use of experiential strategies to implement specific  CBT techniques (e.g., role play, modeling, corrective feedback  and reinforcement);  (f)  ability to conduct sessions with developmental sensitivity (e.g.,  using age-appropriate worksheets, instruction, play-based  activities, token economies);  (g)  ability to facilitate an appropriate level of in session collaboration  between child or adolescent, parent and therapist;  (h)  ability to facilitate parents to take an appropriate role between  sessions (e.g., as coach);  (i)  ability to collaboratively set, plan and review personally  meaningful homework;  (j)  ability to end sessions in a planned manner.  Source: Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011, p. 94). Category Individual techniques Table 1.3 Specific CBT techniques. 8. Managing negative thoughts:  (a)  cognitive restructuring;  (b)  behavioral experiments;  (c)  thought substitution/self-talk;  (d)  positive imagery;  (e)  thought stopping/interruption;  (f)  thought acceptance.  9. Changing maladaptive behaviors:  (a)  interoceptive exposure;  (b)  in vivo exposure;  (c)  imaginal/narrative exposure;  (d)  response prevention;  (e)  behavioral activation;  (f)  pleasant events scheduling;  (g)  self-evaluation and self-rewards.  10. Managing maladaptive mood  (a)  emotion identification, expression, and  and arousal:  regulation;  (b)  progressive muscle relaxation;  (c)  applied tension;  (d)  breathing retraining.  11. General skills training:  (a)  problem-solving skills;  (b)  interpersonal engagement skills;  (c)  friendship skills;  (d)  communication and negotiation skills;  (e)  assertiveness skills;  (f)  dealing with bullying skills.  12. Modifying the family environment:  (a)  family communication and conflict  resolution;  (b)  parental expectations management;  (c)  parent intrusiveness and overprotection  management;  (d)  parent contingency management;  (e)  parent emotion management;  (f)  parent modeling of adaptive behavior.  Source: Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011, p. 94). mentoring therapists who will be (or are) treating children and adolescents with anxiety and depression, and at trainers who are developing and/or delivering training programs in university or college settings and continuing professional development programs. The book will assist this audience with the development of comprehensive and effective training curricula, will guide trainers and supervisors on relevant competencies that should be assessed throughout training, and can be used as a resource to support training or supervision programs leading to trainee therapists gaining a wide range of empirically based competencies. Second, given the current push for therapists to assess their own level of competence and to govern their own professional development (e.g., Bellande, Winicur, and Cox 2010), this book is aimed at therapists who wish to gain an understanding of the competencies they need to acquire in order to effectively work with the targeted population and to come to know what competent practice looks like for each individual competency; and the competency descriptions will provide a benchmark against which they can assess themselves. Third and finally, the aim of this book is to improve the quality of the treatment provided to children and adolescents as a result of the enhancement of individual therapists’ abilities. Book structure This book is divided into three parts that reflect the three-domain structure of the competencies model described earlier. Further, chapters within these three parts broadly map onto the competency categories of each domain. For example, Part I covers the generic therapeutic competencies domain of the model and includes five chapters that focus on the four competency categories within this domain, namely “Practicing Professionally,” (which is covered over two chapters) “Understanding Relevant Child and Adolescent Characteristics,” “Building a Positive Relationship,” and “Conducting a Thorough Assessment.” Chapter structure In order to ensure comprehensive coverage of each of the Sburlati and colleagues (2011) competencies as well as consistency throughout the volume, most chapters in this book contain a number of recurrent sections. The headings below give a general description of these sections; the exact wording may have been adapted within each chapter. Chapters 5, 8, and 9 do not follow this structure, as their content does not fit with this manner of organizing (e.g., the chapter is knowledge-based). Key features of competencies The first section of each chapter describes each competency in detail, highlighting the behavioral markers of each of the individual competencies. Illustrations or examples of the competent use of therapeutic techniques and processes are also included, so as to increase the clinical utility of the book. Competence in treating the anxiety disorders and depression Considerable differences exist among the different anxiety disorders (e.g., between panic disorder and social phobia) and also between anxiety disorders in general and depression. Therefore all chapters include a section focused on how the competencies covered in the chapter might be uniquely tailored when treating these different disorders. Competence in treating both children and adolescents Since this book spans competent practice across a large age range (from early childhood to late adolescence), the third section in each chapter highlights important develop.mental differences in treating children from different age groups. Specifically, unique competencies required for adapting evidence-based CBT for cognitive, emotional, and social maturation are considered. Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them Given that there are inevitably obstacles to the competent implementation of evi.dence-based CBT, the final section of each chapter covers typical obstacles to compe.tent practice and provides strategies for overcoming them. These strategies come from the literature and clinical expertise. Conclusion It is the editors’ hope that this book will become the cornerstone of the development of a generation of therapists competent in treating children and adolescents with anx.iety and depressive disorders. We believe that, by raising the standard of practice, the quality of the treatment provided to youth seeking a way out of these common and debilitating conditions in real-world RCP settings can be enhanced. References Beidas, Rinad S., Andrea J. Barmish, and Philip C. Kendall. 2009. “Training as Usual: Can Therapist Behavior Change after Reading a Manual and Attending a Brief Workshop on Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Youth Anxiety?” The Behavior Therapist, 32: 97–101. Bellande, Bruce J., Zev M. Winicur, and Kathleen M. Cox. 2010. “Urgently Needed: A Safe Place for Self-Assessment on the Path to Maintaining Competence and Improving Performance.” Academic Medicine, 85: 16–18. DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0b013e3181c41b6f Epstein, Ronald M., and Edward M. Hundert. 2002. “Defining and Assessing Professional Competence.” The Journal of the American Medical Association, 287: 226–35. DOI: 10.1001/jama.287.2.226 Herschell, Amy D., David J. Kolko, Barbara L. Baumann, and Abigail C. Davis. 2010. “The Role of Therapist Training in the Implementation of Psychosocial Treatments: A Review and Critique with Recommendations.” Clinical Psychology Review, 30: 448–66. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.02.005 Hunsley, John, and Keegan K. Barker. 2011. “Training for Competency in Professional Psychol.ogy: A Canadian Perspective.” Australian Psychologist, 46: 142–5. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742.9544.2011.00027.x Kaslow, Nadine J. 2004. “Competencies in Professional Psychology.” American Psychologist, 59: 774–81. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.59.8.774 Kaslow, Nadine J., Kathi A. Borden, Frank L. Collins, Jr., Linda Forrest, Joyce Illfelder-Kaye, Paul D. Nelson, … Mary E. Willmuth. 2004. “Competencies Conference: Future Direc.tions in Education and Credentialing in Professional Psychology.” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 60: 699–712. DOI: 10.1002/jclp.20016 Knight, Bob G. 2011. “Training in Professional Psychology in the US: An Increased Focus on Competency Attainment.” Australian Psychologist, 46: 140–1. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742.9544.2011.00026.x Laidlaw, Ken., and David Gillanders. 2011. “Clinical Psychology Training in the UK: Towards the Attainment of Competence.” Australian Psychologist, 46: 146–50. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-9544.2011.00035.x Pachana, Nancy A., Kate Sofronoff, Theresa Scott, and Edward Helmes. 2011. “Attainment of Competencies in Clinical Psychology Training: Ways Forward in the Australian Context.” Australian Psychologist, 46: 67–76. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-9544.2011.00029.x Rakovshik, Sarah G., and Freda McManus. 2010. “Establishing Evidence-Based Training in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: A Review of Current Empirical Findings and Theoretical Guidance.” Clinical Psychology Review, 30: 496–516. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.03.004 Roberts, Michael C., Kathi A. Borden, Martha Dennis Christiansen, and Shane J. Lopez. 2005. “Fostering a Culture Shift: Assessment of Competence in the Education and Careers of Professional Psychologists.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 36: 355–61. DOI: 10.1037/0735-7028.36.4.355 Roth, Anthony D., and Stephen Pilling. 2008. “Using an Evidence-Based Methodology to Identify the Competences Required to Deliver Effective Cognitive and Behavioural Ther.apy for Depression and Anxiety Disorders.” Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36: 129–47. DOI: 10.1017/S1352465808004141 Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14: 89–109. DOI: 10.1007/s10567-011-0083-6 Weisz, John R., Ana M. Ugueto, Daniel M. Cheron, and Jenny Herren. 2013. “Evidence-Based Youth Psychotherapy in the Mental Health Ecosystem.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 42: 274–86. DOI: 10.1080/15374416.2013.764824 