19 Modifying the Family Environment Polly Waite, Monika Parkinson, Lucy Willetts, and Cathy Creswell Introduction Studies that have evaluated family-based CBT interventions have not provided compel.ling evidence that the inclusion of families improves treatment outcome for children and young people by comparison with individual child-focused treatments (Creswell and Cartwright-Hatton 2007); however, the very fact that most young people live with their family and rely on it for their basic needs to be met suggests that families should be taken into consideration in some respect when treating the child or young person. Accordingly, evidence-based treatments for anxiety and depression in young people have typically recommended the involvement of families in treatment; but the degree to which they are involved and the nature of this involvement varies. In some cases parental involvement may be focused on facilitating treatment for the young person (e.g., by bringing him/her to treatment sessions and by encouraging him/her to complete home tasks), but in other cases family factors may play a role in the maintenance of the disorder, hence the treatment may be more efficient and effective if these factors are addressed as part of the treatment. This chapter describes different ways clinicians may target potential family-maintenance factors, using a range of techniques drawn from evidence-based treatment programs and from our own clinical practice. We will begin by describing a model for under.standing possible family-related cognitive and behavioral pathways to the development and maintenance of anxiety and depression in children and young people. We will then outline specific therapist competencies for working with families, before referring to how families have been involved within specific interventions for anxiety disorders and depression in children and young people. Finally, we will discuss decision-making considerations about who should be involved in treatment and common obstacles to overcome in treatment. Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. The Role of the Family Environment in Anxiety and Depression in Children and Young People Although the role of the family environment in the development and maintenance of anxiety and depression in children and young people is not fully understood, research evidence to date suggests an interplay between a number of different factors, which include genetics, the young person’s temperament, and environmental factors. Environ.mental factors that are particularly amenable to intervention are parental expectations, beliefs, and behaviors around and in response to the child. Figure 19.1 shows a model for understanding potential cognitive and behavioral parenting pathways to anxiety and depression in children and young people, adapted from Creswell, Murray, James, and Cooper (2011). The model suggests that anxiety or depression in children and young people may be maintained by particular parental beliefs, expectations, and behavioral responses as well as by wider parental practices, which may themselves be reinforced by the young person’s anxious or depressive responses. Furthermore, parental psychopathology may both elevate, and be elevated by, an increased level of these cognitive and behavioral responses among parents and their children. One example, outlined in the model, is a scenario where a parent may have overly high expectations of his/her child that lead to criticism, conflict, and low levels of praise (Cole and Rehm 1986). Such responses may then reinforce the young person’s negative self-belief and withdrawal, thus creating a bigger discrepancy between parents’ expectations and the young person’s performance. Alternatively, if a parent holds low expectations, for example, of his/her child’s ability to cope with challenge, this may lead to parental over-involvement and reduced encouragement (Creswell, Apetroaia, Murray, and Cooper 2012). These responses may cause a young person Figure 19.1 Cognitive and behavioral parenting pathways to child anxiety and depression. Adapted from Creswell, Murray, James, and Cooper (2011). to have a low sense of mastery and highlight potential threats in the environment, thus maintaining anxiety and confirming the parent’s beliefs and expectations. In addition to parental responses to the child, parental behaviors around the child may also serve to maintain the young person’s symptoms of anxiety and depression. For example, parental modeling of maladaptive responses, such as inhibited behaviors (Murray et al. 2008), avoidance of problem-solving behaviors, or withdrawal from pleasant activities (Goodman and Gotlib 1999) may promote similar responses among children and young people. Similarly, parental narrative styles may transfer information that highlights possible dangers or reinforces avoidance of potential challenge (e.g., Barrett, Rapee, Dadds, and Ryan 1996). Key Features of Competencies The above model has implications for how therapists work clinically with families of children and young people with anxiety and depressive disorders in order to improve efficiency and outcomes from treatment. In line with this model, Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011, p. 94) outline the following specific CBT techniques for working with families: (i) parent emotion management; (ii) parent expectations management; (iii) family communication and conflict resolution; (iv) parental intru.siveness and overprotection management; (v) parental contingency management; and (vi) parent modeling of adaptive behavior. We will now describe each of these tech.niques in greater detail, highlighting the theory and research behind each one, describing how therapists can implement these techniques and, finally, providing case examples that aim to highlight how a therapist could make use of these techniques when working with child and adolescent anxiety and depression. Parent emotion management It is well established that parents of children and young people with anxiety have higher rates of anxiety and depressive disorders than parents of young people who are not anxious (e.g., Cooper, Fearn, Willetts, Seabrook, and Parkinson 2006; Last, Hersen, Kazdin, Orvaschel, and Perrin 1991), and that lifetime prevalence rates of depression in parents of children and young people with depression are considerably higher than in parents of young people who do not have depression (e.g., Asarnow, Goldstein, Tompson, and Guthrie 1993). Furthermore, parental anxiety and depres.sion have been found to be associated with poorer treatment outcomes for children and young people with anxiety (e.g., Cobham, Dadds, and Spence 1998; Cooper, Gallop, Willetts, and Creswell 2008; Southam-Gerow, Kendall, and Weersing 2001), while remission in depression in mothers has been found to have a positive impact on their child’s psychiatric symptoms (including depression) and functioning (e.g., Birmaher 2011; Weissman et al. 2006; Wickramaratne et al. 2011). There are a number of reasons that may account for poorer treatment outcomes for children and young people in the context of parental emotional difficulties, including shared stressful life events (e.g., Hammen et al. 1987) and genetic factors (e.g., Eley et al. 2011); but here we have focused on those cognitive and behavioral factors that are amenable to therapeutic change. As suggested in Figure 19.1 and illustrated in Case 19.1a, anxiety and depression in parents are hypothesized to make them behave in a way that may maintain their child’s problem. Examples of such behavior are taking over, enabling the child to avoid a situation, disengaging from the young person and from the family, and modeling maladaptive responses. These responses may be accounted for by parents’ negative expectations about the child (e.g., “she’ll freak out,” “he’s not going to be able to cope,” or “she’s going to fail”) or by parents’ ability to alter or cope with the situation (“unless I get involved, they won’t be able to cope,” “there is nothing I can do,” or “I can’t bear it”). If the anxiety or depression experienced by the parent is clinically significant, that parent may be keen to seek individual therapy to address his/her own concerns. However, many individuals with significant mental health difficulties wait a consider.able amount of time before seeking help through clinical services (e.g., Hollander 1997; Stobie, Taylor, Quigley, Ewing, and Salkovskis 2007); this is likely to relate to a range of factors, including fear of or shame about revealing one’s experiences to others. Therefore the child’s or young person’s clinician may have an important role in enabling the parent to make sense of his/her symptoms and to understand their impact on the child, in challenging any associated beliefs that may be unhelpful Case 19.1a Background to Joshua Georgia was the mother of two sons. Her younger son, 8-year-old Joshua, was referred to the clinic for separation anxiety and generalized anxiety. Joshua had difficulty going to school as he struggled to part from his mum at the school gate in the morning and worried about being away from her during the day in case something bad happened to her. Georgia responded to Joshua’s separation anxiety by taking him into the class each day, sorting out his coat and bag for him and waiting with him until the class was ready to start. Joshua also experi.enced anxiety during the school day about a variety of everyday issues: strug.gling with his work, forgetting his school lunch money, and being teased by another child. Georgia frequently went into school and tried to resolve these issues on Joshua’s behalf. At home, Joshua found it difficult to go upstairs without his mum or brother, as he worried something might get him. Bedtimes were also a problem and Georgia was finding it increasingly difficult to get Joshua to go to sleep without her being there to reassure him. During sessions with Georgia it became clear that she experienced a great deal of anxiety about her children and worried that harm might come to them. She described how it was difficult for her to allow them to go out of her sight without experiencing worry and intrusive images of something bad happening to them. She found that she could only manage the worry by phoning to check they were okay or by keeping the boys in her sight, even when they were playing in the back garden. She also refused invitations from friends to go out in the evening, as she worried that, if she went out and left the boys with a babysitter, something terrible could happen without her being there to protect them. Case 19.1b Working with Joshua’s mum around her own emotions Joshua’s mum, Georgia, worked with the therapist to better understand her own cognitions, feelings, and behaviors and together they were able to map out how these were contributing to Joshua’s anxiety. Through psycho-education and by carrying out a survey of other parents, the therapist successfully taught Georgia that these kinds of worries and images, while distressing, are normal and expe.rienced by everyone. She had already come to the conclusion that her phone calls were exacerbating the problem, and so the therapist and Georgia designed a behavioral experiment that Georgia then undertook, in which Joshua went to a friend’s house and she did not phone to check on him. As a result, she learned that nothing bad happened, that she could cope without phoning, and that over time her anxiety diminished. In turn, this had a positive effect on Joshua’s anxiety, as it increased his confidence that he could cope with being away from his mum without her making contact, and it set him an example of ways to manage fears and worries. in relation to the child’s treatment progress, in addressing issues around stigma and blame, in providing information about services and the process of therapy, and in supporting the parent in the referral process. In cases where symptoms are not at a clinically significant level, parent emotion management (Sburlati et al. 2011) can be used throughout treatment (e.g., Rapee et al. 2006), to enable parents to learn the same CBT strategies that are taught to the young person. By using the example of Joshua and his mother Georgia, Case 19.1b illustrates strategies that a therapist could use to address parental emotions. Parental expectations management The expectations that parents place on their children can impact on parental behavioral responses and ultimately on the young person’s self-perception. Parents of children and young people with depression are more likely to have unrealistically high expectations of their children (Cole and Rehm 1986) and are less likely to provide positive reinforcement, or they reserve positive reinforcement for high achievements (Cole and Rehm 1986; Pineda, Cole, and Bruce 2007). High parental criticism and hostility, emotional over-involvement, and a lack of warmth have been observed in families of children and young people with depression (e.g., Asarnow et al. 1993; Goodman and Gotlib 1999), and young people with depression consis.tently report less support, warmth, and closeness from parents (Greenberger, Chen, Tally, and Dong 2000). In the context of depression in children and young peo.ple, these parental expectations and behaviors are likely to compound the young person’s difficulties. For children and young people with anxiety, it is hypothesized that low parental expectations, for example, about the child’s ability to cope may lead parents to reinforce their child’s avoidant and over-dependent behaviors, main taining the young person’s anxiety (e.g., Creswell et al. 2011; Hudson and Rapee 2004). The main features of parental expectations management strategies include thera.pists’ identification of areas where parental expectations are unrealistic (e.g., either too high or too low/anxious), and working with parents to find a more balanced and empathic approach. For children and young people with both anxiety and depression, this may first involve psycho-education with the family about the influence of symp.toms of anxiety and depression on the young person, in order to help parents develop realistic expectations. This may be followed by discussion and formulation designed to develop a shared understanding of the potential cycles in which parental expectations and responses may maintain the young person’s anxious and/or depressed cognitions and behaviors, and vice versa. Parents are thus helped by therapists to identify and try out different responses to their child, in order to test alternative expectations and appraisals of their child’s behaviors. Case 19.2a illustrates several strategies that therapists may use to help parents manage their expectations of their child. Fifteen-year-old Sophie was referred by her general practitioner to the local child and adolescent mental health service after her mother reported that she “couldn’t cope with her anymore.” Sophie had become withdrawn and quiet but also very irritable at times. She had stopped seeing friends and going to her usual afterschool clubs and would often spend hours in her room, avoiding the rest of the family and avoiding her usual activities and chores. When Sophie did spend time with the family, it often resulted in arguments, especially with her mother and younger brother. Sophie also started avoiding doing her school.work, and she would get very upset with her parents when they commented on this. It became clear after a detailed assessment that Sophie was depressed and had been feeling progressively worse over the past six months. The family had experienced a number of stressful events prior to Sophie’s mood change and, in addition, Sophie’s boyfriend had recently ended their relationship. Sophie’s mum also had a long history of depression, which was currently controlled with medication. Sophie’s father suffered from periods of intense anxiety and saw himself as “a bit of a perfectionist.” In the initial treatment sessions, the therapist aimed to develop a shared under.standing of Sophie’s difficulties, with both Sophie and her parents. It became clear that the family experienced regular conflict about small matters and there were difficulties in being able to see others’ points of view. Sophie and her par.ents avoided open and honest discussions and seemed to engage in a lot of “mind-reading without listening,” which tended to result in misunderstandings and stressful interactions. For example, Sophie’s father thought that Sophie just didn’t care about her schoolwork, so he reminded her regularly about her recent low grades as a way of trying to motivate her to work harder. He actually thought herself more. Sophie assumed that her father thought she was stupid and lazy and felt criticized whenever he mentioned her grades. She was convinced that he thought she was “a waste of space.” Sophie would become angry and snap back at her father, which usually escalated into arguments. It was also evident that the family was overwhelmed by many practical problems that were not being addressed, and this added to the stress and regular family conflict. The therapist first established a list of agreed goals with the family. Everyone was encouraged to agree to an order of priority for these goals. Both Sophie and her parents identified several shared goals, including the goal of “everyone getting along more” as an important area to work on, and Sophie wanted her parents to “stop being on her back all the time.” The therapist provided psycho-education about depression and associated symptoms and the role of stress as a risk and maintaining factor in depression. The therapist emphasized the debili.tating nature of depressive symptoms and suggested that Sophie may be struggling with her usual set of activities and responsibilities due to these symptoms. This helped the parents to lower their expectations of Sophie’s behavior. The therapist modeled patient and active listening and summarized everyone’s experiences and possible maintenance cycles through the use of simple maintenance diagrams on a flipchart. It was helpful for the family to see how small misunderstandings or times when they didn’t listen to each other and made assumptions often led to bigger arguments and seemed to make Sophie feel more “useless,” depressed, hopeless, and withdrawn from the family. In a separate session with Sophie’s parents, the therapist revisited the topics from the previous session and encouraged the parents to further discuss family interactions and how these may impact on Sophie’s mood. This was an oppor.tunity for the therapist to address parental beliefs about depressive symptoms and the level of Sophie’s control over them. Sophie’s father reflected that he was unaware his well-meaning comments may have been perceived as critical by Sophie; and he hadn’t realized that she found it so hard to concentrate because of her low mood. The therapist helped the parents identify new ways of respond.ing to Sophie, with an emphasis on a calm and empathic parenting style, positive reinforcement (particularly when Sophie showed approach-type behavior and engagement with family and activities, as opposed to withdrawal) and lower and more realistic expectations. Family communication and conflict resolution Communication and conflict difficulties arise in most families from time to time, but they are particularly important in the context of anxiety and depression in children and young people. Interpersonal conflicts within the home environment are often stressful and, as such, they present risk and function as maintaining factors, for depression in particular (Grant, Compas, Thurm, McMahon, and Gipson 2004; Joiner, Coine, and Blalock 1999). Families where there is a young person with depression have been found to experience more communication problems and greater levels of interpersonal conflict (e.g., Kaslow, Deering, and Racusin 1994; Rapee 1997), and young people with depression report more frequent perceptions of family conflict (Stein et al. 2000). In addition, conflict with parents is associated with suicidal behavior in young people (Kerfoot, Dyer, Harrington, Woodham, and Harrington 1996). The interpersonal difficulties experienced by children and young people with depression (Gotlib and Hammen 1992; Sheeber, Davis, Lever, Hops, and Tildesley 2007) may be influenced by negative cognitive biases associated with depressed mood (Beck 1976). For example, young people with depression are more likely to make negative attributions about their parents’ behaviors and to underreport parental happy and neutral affect, by comparison with young people who do not have depres.sion (Ehrmantrout, Allen, Leve, Davis, and Sheeber 2011), so the former may be inclined to respond in a more hostile manner to their parents. These interactions may be exacerbated in the presence of parental psychopathology, in particular depressed mood (e.g., Goodman and Gotlib 1999), which is likely to influence both cognitive and behavioral parental responses. Taken together or in combination, these factors may create an environment that is vulnerable to a vicious cycle characterized by frequent family discord and depression in both young people and their parents. Several empirically tested treatments for children and young people with depression include strategies aimed at family communication and conflict resolution (e.g., Brent and Poling 1997; Clarke, Lewinsohn, and Hops 1990; Curry et al. 2005). The main aim of the strategies is to help family members to communicate more effectively with each other in order to improve the relationship between parents and their children and to reduce the likelihood of interpersonal conflict. One of the most common conflict resolution strategies employed with families in treatment programs is family problem-solving skills training. In conflict resolution or family problem-solving skills training, those family members involved in the conflict are taught by the therapist to (i) identify the problem; (ii) generate potential solutions together; (iii) evaluate the predicted outcome for each of these solutions; (iv) choose the most appropriate course of action; and (v) evaluate the outcome (e.g., Curry et al. 2005; Rapee et al. 2006). Case 19.2b illustrates how therapists may use family problem-solving skills training (in combination with other CBT strategies and techniques) to address family communication and conflict resolution. Parental intrusiveness and overprotection management It is well established that there is a link between anxiety in children and young people and parental control (e.g., Wood, McLeod, Sigman, Hwang, and Chu 2003), in particular a lack of autonomy granting (McLeod, Wood, and Weisz 2007). In addition, experimental research has supported the hypothesis that a lack of autonomy granting leads to an increase in anxiety symptoms in children and young people (e.g., de Wilde and Rapee 2008; Thirlwall and Creswell 2010). With regard to low mood, psychological control – such as manifest in the induction of guilt and/or shame – has been linked to childhood depression (e.g., Barber 1996). Similarly, depressed children describe their parents as more controlling than do those without depression (e.g., Stark, Humphrey, Crook and Lewis 1990). Case 19.2b Reducing conflict and improving communication with Sophie and her family The therapist encouraged Sophie and her parents to engage in several exercises aimed to teach them effective problem-solving strategies in order to reduce conflict and rehearse alternatives to avoidance in dealing with problems. They were encouraged to draw up common problem lists, generate solutions, evaluate them, and choose appropriate ones with action plans. It became apparent that Sophie and her parents had very different views about how to solve particular problems (e.g., how little quality time the family had together), and at first there was quite a bit of resentment and conflict about how to tackle these things together. This was an opportunity for the therapist to help the family with skills such as active listening, negotiation and compromise, assertiveness and disclosure of feelings, and making contracts of agreement. Making written contracts for how to manage common problems was particularly helpful when emotions escalated at home and the contract (hanging on the fridge in the kitchen) could be con.sulted to remind everyone of the agreed steps. The therapist also helped the family to schedule pleasant family activities in order to ensure that opportunities for positive time together were created and acted upon. Reducing parental overprotectiveness and intrusiveness is thus seen as an important part of the treatment for children and young people with anxiety disorders, where these parental behaviors are evident in the family environment. Such reduction can be achieved by using a number of strategies, which ultimately aim to promote independence in the young person. Initially it is helpful for the therapist to identify the type of situations in which the parent is being intrusive or overprotective; and these situations may well be linked to areas in which the parent experiences anxiety (Creswell et al. 2012). For example, Figure 19.2 demonstrates the maintenance cycle that was developed for Case 19.1a, which then informed treatment interventions. Consideration of what is appropriate for the young person’s developmental level is also important. Supporting the parent in allowing the child to be more independent might involve providing the parent with alternative ways to support the young person, such as promoting the young person’s use of particular CBT strategies, for instance problem solv.ing or Socratic questioning. It may also involve contingency management, whereby the parent actively rewards the young person for independent activity. The reduction of parental provisions of reassurance is often a key part of promoting autonomy; instead, the therapist should enable parents to encourage their child to challenge their anxious thoughts and should give the young person clear positive messages about his/her ability to cope on his/her own. Some parents may find reducing their overprotectiveness extremely chal.lenging. In our experience, empowering parents to feel confident about using alternative responses is often effective. However, at times parental emotions and expectations will need to be managed in the first instance, in order to allow them to change their behavioral responses to their child. Case 19.1c illustrates a therapist making use of parental intrusive.ness and overprotection management in combination with other specific CBT techniques. Joshua’s thoughts Figure 19.2 The maintenance cycle around bedtimes that was developed with Georgia, Joshua’s mum. Case 19.1c Increasing Joshua’s autonomy and independence The therapist discussed with Joshua’s mum, Georgia, what might be developmentally appropriate ways of dealing with the situations where Joshua becomes anxious (e.g., at the beginning of the school day and at bedtimes) and considered how to encourage Joshua’s independence in managing them. Using a process of graded exposure and associated contingency management, Georgia gradually withdrew her support in the morning on arrival at school, until Joshua was able to play in the playground with his friends before entering the classroom on his own. By doing this, Joshua learnt that he was able to cope without Georgia when he arrived at school. She also encouraged him to problem-solve the issues that arose at school, with her support, and to independently try out one of the solutions that were generated. For example, Joshua agreed to talk to his teacher at the end of class if he had found the work difficult, rather than asking Georgia to talk to the teacher for him. Once again, this challenged his beliefs about not being able to cope without Georgia. The therapist and Georgia also reflected on Joshua’s general levels of independence, and Georgia elected to encourage him to be more independent in a number of other areas, including his packing his own school bag each morning and having an alarm clock to allow him to get up independently in the morning. The combination of these strategies was successful in increasing not only Joshua’s level of independence, but also his confidence and self-esteem, and it enabled him to develop a belief that he was able to cope independently in a variety of different situations. Parental contingency management Contingency management is used, with excellent outcomes, in the treatment of chil.dren and young people with a number of disorders (most commonly, oppositional defiant and conduct disorder) (e.g., Webster-Stratton 1984). It is also routinely included, with good effect, in anxiety-focused interventions for young people (e.g., Cartwright-Hatton, Laskey, Rust, and McNally 2010; Rapee et al. 2006). Contingency management is, however, not a key component in the treatment for children and young people with depression. Nevertheless, there is some research to suggest that, in families where a young person is depressed, the levels of praise are lower (Cole and Rehm 1986), and that, when the young person expresses positive emotions or behavior, parents may respond in a negative or withdrawn way, while responding more positively when the young person appears more depressed (e.g., Schwartz et al. 2012). This suggests that there may be a role for contingency management in the treatment of depression in young people. Contingency management encourages parents to reinforce positive, adaptive behav.iors and to ignore or negatively reinforce unhelpful or undesirable behaviors. In the first instance, it is important for the therapist to acknowledge that it is often a natural response to pay particular attention to the young person when (s)he is struggling (whether this attention is manifested in providing reassurance, stepping in to solve the problem, or expressing frustration) and less attention when the person is managing well. It is then essential that the therapist provides a clear rationale for positively rein.forcing attempts to cope with challenges or to try out new responses. Therapists can then encourage parents to keep records of their own responses to the young person’s behaviors in order to gather a clear picture of possible reinforcers. This will include parental responses to the young person when (s)he is anxious or depressed (e.g., the parents’ being aware of whether they are critical to a greater or smaller extent depending on their child’s mood, or their being aware of providing excessive comfort.ing and reassurance to the child), as well as parental responses when the young person is managing well (e.g., the parents’ not noticing, ignoring, or responding in with.drawn, negative ways). The therapist would then work with the parents to identify whether they are giving excessive reassurance or attention to anxious behaviors and/ or are being overly critical of their depressed child, then to replace these actions with Socratic questioning, helping the child to make use of his/her own problem-solving strategies. Parents can also be taught to respond positively to adaptive behaviors by giving specific and labeled praise or by using a structured reward system, and to actively ignore undesirable behaviors. Case 19.3a provides an example of how parental contingency management (in combination with other CBT strategies and techniques) might be used by a therapist who is seeing a young boy with anxiety and his parents. Parent modeling of adaptive behavior Experimental and prospective longitudinal research has shown that children’s responses to potentially fear-provoking stimuli are influenced by their observation of how adults behave (e.g., De Rosnay, Cooper, Tsigaras, and Murray 2006; Gerull and Rapee 2002; Murray, Cooper, Creswell, Schofield, and Sack 2007; Murray et al. 2008). Case 19.3a Background and contingency management with George’s parents George was a 6-year-old boy who experienced social anxiety. George’s parents, Katherine and Mark, came to the clinic with George for the initial assessment. Mark reported that George had always been shy and found new situations difficult. George would become anxious as soon as he had to interact with anyone who was unfamiliar and would typically hide behind his mum or dad and refuse to speak or make eye contact. He worried a lot about being told off at school, and so he would never put his hand up to answer a question or speak in front of more than one or two other children. Mark described how both he and Katherine would normally give George repeated reassurance that everything would be okay when he was faced with an anxiety-provoking situation, but he also reported feeling frustrated by George’s anxious behavior; he would become cross with him. For example, he recently took George to a friend’s birthday party, where George refused to join in and clung to his dad. Mark reassured him that everything would be fine but felt increasingly cross and frustrated that George would still not join in. After a while he found himself telling George that no one would want to be his friend if he didn’t play with them and they would think he was a baby; but this appeared to make George even more reluctant to participate and left Mark feeling guilty. The therapist worked with George’s parents and they first mapped out the cycle of parent and child cognitions and behaviors that occurred between them in chal.lenging situations such as the party. Through doing this, the therapist assisted George’s parents to identify the need to respond to George in a manner that would be less likely to reinforce his anxious thoughts and behaviors. On this basis, the therapist and parents agreed that Mark and Katherine would set up a reward system for George’s participation in social activities, such as parties, in conjunction with a graded exposure hierarchy plan. In addition, they specifically praised George’s attempts to join in with other children, and they endeavored to keep their own emo.tions in check. On the occasions when George would not join in, they would ignore his clinging behavior and repeated requests for reassurance. Instead they would calmly remind him of what he had agreed to do and of the associated reward and then would ignore all subsequent anxious behavior. Given that parents of children and young people with anxiety disorders are at an increased risk of an anxiety disorder themselves, it follows that young people with anxiety disorders are more likely to see their parents express anxiety than those young people without anxiety. Similarly, children and young people who are depressed may be more likely than those who do not have depression to have seen their parents withdraw and disengage as a result of their own low mood (Goodman and Gotlib 1999). The aim of parent modeling of adaptive behavior (Sburlati et al. 2011) is to encourage the parent to use strategies that are helpful and adaptive and to discourage behaviors that are unhelpful, such as avoidance or withdrawal. This is especially As the therapist talked with Katherine and Mark, George’s parents, it became clear that Katherine experienced a great deal of anxiety in social situations, and this was also evident from her responses to a self-report measure of anxiety that she completed. Katherine described how she had experienced similar difficulties as a child and continued to find some social situations stressful. She reported that, where possible, she would try to avoid putting herself in unfamiliar or diffi.cult situations and described how she was struggling with the renovations that were being carried out to their home, as it meant having workmen in the house that she had to speak to. Where possible, she would try to get Mark to speak to them, especially if she thought this may involve conflict, for instance when asking them to change something they had done. In social situations like parties, she described how she would try to keep busy and find jobs to do in the kitchen, so that she did not end up having to talk to someone she did not know very well. One of the therapist’s goals for the first session was to establish a collaborative relationship where Katherine and Mark felt able to openly discuss what was hap.pening, without feeling that they were being blamed for George’s difficulties. They then discussed different factors that contributed toward the development of anxiety, before considering which were the factors that Katherine and Mark had control over – for instance how they parented George, or what he might learn from their responses in anxious situations. The therapist described how children learn a lot by watching how their parents behave, so that, if parents can behave in ways that promote coping and do not avoid anxious situations, this is really helpful. She encouraged Katherine to use a “Botox Face” or adopt an “Oscar-Winning Performance” (see Cartwright-Hatton et al. 2010) for situa.tions that she would find anxiety provoking, so that she could appear calm, even if she did not feel so underneath. useful within the context of treatment for child anxiety. Case 19.3b highlights how a therapist assisted George’s parents, Katharine and Mark, to model adaptive behavior. Competence in Treating Anxiety Disorders and Depression The application of the specific CBT techniques from the modifying the family environ.ment category of Sburlati and colleagues’ (2011) model is different for anxiety and for depressive disorders. In consequence, the therapist treating children and young people with anxiety disorders and/or depression ought to become proficient at identifying when these techniques are necessary (which is done on the basis of the disorder presen.tation or case formulation) and what is the most effective way of implementing them. The following section briefly highlights how, with the help of established, empirically supported treatments, a clinician can make use of the modifying the family environment techniques in the treatment of anxiety disorders and depression. Anxiety disorders It is yet to be established that the addition of family components in treatment pro.vides benefit above and beyond individual CBT for anxiety disorders in children and young people (Creswell and Cartwright-Hatton 2007). Comparisons between studies are, however, difficult to make when different treatment studies include such a wide range of interventions for targeting the family environment. Many empirically supported treatments for anxiety disorders in children and young people make use of (i) parent emotion management, aimed at lowering the parent’s own level of anxiety; (ii) parent expectations management, designed to increase unneces.sarily low parental expectations; (iii) parent intrusiveness and overprotection management, designed to diminish parental overprotection; (iv) parental contingency management, undertaken in order to assist parents to praise and reward non-anxious behaviors; and (v) parent modeling of adaptive behavior, aimed at encouraging parents to model non-anxious behaviors (e.g., Cartwright-Hatton et al. 2010; Rapee et al. 2006). The modifying the family environment technique that is used less often when treating anxiety in children and young people is (vi) family communication and conflict resolu.tion, but this is commonly included in empirically supported treatments for children and young people with depression. A number of anxiety disorder treatment manuals are available for anxiety disorders in children and young people; some of them are transdiagnostic, others are disorder-specific. Transdiagnostic treatment packages Probably the most commonly used manualized treatments are Coping Cat (8–13 years) (Howard, Chu, Krain, Marrs-Garcia, and Kendall 2000) and Cool Kids (7–16 years) (Rapee et al. 2006), and derivatives of these programs have successfully been employed with adolescents (e.g., the CAT Project, 14–17 years; see Kendall, Choudhury, Hudson, and Webb 2002) and with younger children (e.g., From Timid to Tiger, for children up to 10 years of age, a program delivered solely via parents; see Cartwright-Hatton et al. 2010). The most commonly used strategies in these treatment protocols are management of parental intrusiveness and over-involvement, parent contingency management, and parental modeling of adaptive behavior. For example, in From Timid to Tiger there is considerable focus on contingency management through the use of praise designed to build the young person’s confidence, through rewards designed to help with motivation, through the setting of limits, and through withdrawal of attention from anxious behavior. Unhelpful parental cognitions – such as the idea that worry is dangerous for the young person – and behaviors – such as modeling anxiety – are also identified and addressed. In Cool Kids, BRAVE, and Overcoming contingency management, parental over-involvement, and parental modeling of adaptive behavior are all addressed in the parent sessions. Parents are asked to record their responses to their child in order to increase their awareness of their responses and to attempt to alter them where necessary. In Cool Kids and Overcoming, parent emotion management is also included. In particular, parents are encouraged to engage in their own exposure tasks if they are anxious, which provides them with an opportunity not only to tackle their own fears, but to model adaptive, brave behavior to their child. Disorder-specific treatment packages Social phobia Children and young people with social phobia are commonly treated using a transdiagnostic approach; however, there are also treatments that are disorder-specific and have established excellent outcomes (e.g., Beidel, Turner, and Morris 1998; Spence, Donovan and Brechman-Toussaint 2000). Both of these particular programs place a great deal of emphasis on the young person’s acquisition and development of social skills, and parents are involved to varying degrees to support the newly acquired skills. Beidel and colleagues’ social effectiveness therapy for children and young people involves the parents, with the aim of enabling them to support the young person in completing exposure tasks successfully between sessions, and it positively reinforces the young person’s brave behavior. In the treatment devised by Spence and colleagues, for one of the groups of children and young people having CBT, the authors included a parent component where parents were taught to regularly model, prompt, and reinforce their child’s developing social skills, in an attempt to generalize them to new environments. The addition of the parent component was associated with a 50 percent improvement in the number of children and young people who became free of social phobia after treatment. Specific phobia While it is likely that parental factors are relevant in the development and maintenance of the child’s phobia, Öst and Ollendick’s (2001) single-session phobia treatment does not require parents to be involved beyond being consulted in case the child is unable to respond to certain instructions, bringing the child to treatment, and taking the child to designated locations for the homework or practice to take place. Recent developments of this approach have, however, augmented the standard treatment with a parental component, which primarily involves psycho-education to parents about phobias and their causes and observation of the child’s treatment, with a commentary designed to highlight the steps that the child is working through. During this process the various components and the importance of the reinforcement of child exposure and of continual rehearsal beyond the treatment session are emphasized (Ollendick 2013). Panic disorder Parents of children and young people with panic disorder are known to have elevated rates of panic disorder themselves (Last and Strauss 1989), so including parents in the treatment may be of clear benefit in this context. Similar techniques to those seen in transdiagnostic anxiety treatments are included in Pincus, Ehrenreich and Mattis’ (2008) panic control treatment for adolescents (PCT-A). In this program parents can be included in a portion of the treatment sessions, in order to ensure that they can help reinforce the concepts that the young person learns in therapy. Therapists are encouraged to engage parents as co-therapists and coaches, rather than seeing them as clients in their own right and potentially getting embroiled in larger family issues. Pincus and colleagues describe how parents are often worried that their child may be in significant distress during a panic attack and therefore may inadvertently reinforce the young person’s avoidance of places or situations that could trigger panic symptoms. Therefore parents are given educational handouts and are involved in sessions; the idea is to enable them to better understand their parenting styles and how they inadvertently maintain their child’s anxiety. Parents are also instructed in how to encourage more helpful ways of responding, for instance by being compassionate but encouraging the child to push through the anxiety, downplaying the physical feelings and building up the young person’s exposure to anxiety-provoking situations in a realistic and manageable way. The importance of consistency between parents is addressed, and parents are taught contingency-management techniques in order to positively reinforce brave behaviors. Obsessive–compulsive disorder There is some evidence to suggest that family factors are relevant for understanding obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) in childhood. In particular, Barrett, Shortt, and Healy (2002) found that parents of young people with OCD were less confident about their child’s abilities and independence skills than parents of young people with other anxiety disorders and less likely to use positive problem-solving techniques. Furthermore, Derisley, Libby, Clarke, and Reynolds (2005) found that parents of young people with OCD tended to cope with problems by avoiding them. It is not clear, however, whether these cognitions and behaviors have a maintaining role (rather than, say, simply being a response to the OCD), and hence whether targeting them in treatment would improve outcomes. Empirically supported treatment approaches for OCD in children and young people (March and Mulle 1998; Waite and Williams 2009) consider the role of parents largely in relation to maintaining the young person’s OCD through participation in safety behaviors (e.g., by providing reassurance, carrying out rituals for the child, or enabling avoidance). Waite, Gallop and Atkinson (2009) suggest a flexible approach to parental involvement – an approach based on the wishes of the young person and the individual case conceptualization. In contrast, March and Mulle’s (1998) approach is more structured and involves parent sessions at specific time points in treatment. Both treatment approaches involve the therapist assessing potential family maintain.ing factors and providing psycho-education about how the parents’ behavior can inadvertently keep the young person’s problem alive. Parent contingency management is used to enable parents to reinforce their child’s brave behavior and to make them deal effectively with situations where the young person becomes anxious. When OCD takes up so much time and is such a large part of family life, it is not surprising that parents can start to see the OCD as part of their child. It is therefore important that attention is paid to the positive elements of the young person’s life and that goals are planned that involve dreams and hopes for the future and that do not relate to OCD (Waite et al. 2009). With this in mind, March and Mulle (1998) encourage families to plan ceremonies and notifications, so that the young person is positively reinforced when (s)he is practicing exposure and response prevention or engages in activities unrelated to the OCD. Post-traumatic stress disorder Various factors relating to the family environment appear to be connected to the development and maintenance of post-traumatic stress symptoms in children and young people. In particular, parental depression predicts the development of post-traumatic stress symptoms in children and young people following exposure to a traumatic event (e.g., Smith, Perrin, Yule, and Rabe-Hesketh 2001; Wolmer, Laor, Gershon, Mayes, and Cohen 2000), and this association is mediated by parental endorsement of worry as a coping strategy (Meiser-Stedman, Yule, Dalgleish, Smith, and Glucksman 2006). Furthermore, a number of authors have suggested that parental support is the most critical factor influencing the young person’s adjustment after the trauma, particularly in the case of sexual abuse (e.g., Conte and Schuerman 1987; Everson, Hunter, Runyon, Edelsohn, and Coulter 1989). Parental involvement in therapy may therefore be extremely important for enabling parents to manage their own distress, as well as to provide appropriate support for the young person. In their empirically supported treatment for sexual abuse in children and young people, Deblinger and Heflin (1996) recommend individual sessions with the non-offending parent in order to provide support and information and to develop skills. The approach includes an educational component with information about sexual abuse and involves parents being taught coping skills, so that they are able to deal with their own thoughts and emotions effectively, for example by moving from thinking “I am a bad mother for not protecting my son from being abused” to “The secretive nature of sexual abuse makes it difficult for anyone, even parents, to pick it up. It is not possible to supervise my son every minute of the day.” Parents are also helped to confront and cope with discussions about the young person’s abuse, and they are trained in how to talk to their child about the experience. In addition, they are taught behavior management strategies in order to deal with behaviors such as angry outbursts, anxiety, or sexualized behaviors and to encourage more adaptive ones. Depression Despite the fact that many clinicians agree about the usefulness, and at times necessity, of family involvement in treatments for children and young people with depression, the extent to which the effectiveness of treatments for adolescent depression is enhanced by the inclusion of family components is not clear at present. To date, very few studies have specifically evaluated the possible advantages of interventions that include strategies aimed at modifying the family environment for children and young people with depression. Where they have, a trend toward better outcomes where par.ents are involved in treatment has been observed; but differences in outcomes are not statistically significant (e.g., Clarke, Rhode, Lewinsohn, Hops, and Seeley 1999; Lewinsohn, Clarke, Hops, and Andrews 1990). Despite this, the evidence for associ.ations between family factors and depression in children and young people would suggest that families should be taken into consideration in some way when treating the child or young person. Empirically supported treatments vary in the amount of family and parent involve.ment and often apply a formulation-led, modular approach in determining the degree of use of family strategies for individual clients (e.g., Brent and Poling 1997; Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2005). This degree will depend on individual family functioning, on the quality of relationships, and on whether the parents are able and willing to participate in treatment. Empirically supported treatments for depression in children and young people typically make use of (i) family communication and conflict resolution – to improve negative communication, increase positive communication, improve conflict resolution, and ultimately enhance the quality of the parent–adolescent relationship; (ii) parent expectations management – aimed at lowering unnecessarily high parental expectations of the child or young person with depression; and (iii) parental contingency management – to provide children and young people with positive reinforcement and to reduce neg.ative reinforcement or punishment of the young person with depression (e.g., Brent and Poling 1997; Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2005). Unlike anxiety treatments, depres.sion treatments typically make less use of (iv) parent modeling of adaptive behavior; (v) parental intrusiveness and overprotection management; and (vi) parent emotion management from the modifying the family environment category. However, if parental depression is identified, parents are encouraged to seek their own treatment, and referrals are arranged accordingly. Some treatment programs stress that parental psychopathology must be addressed, and treatment for parents is seen as a necessary component of the overall intervention (e.g., Brent and Poling 1997). Competence in Working with Different Ages and Presenting Problems The age of the child or young person ought to be considered by therapists when planning the degree of parent involvement in treatment. Research suggests that parental involvement may lead to better outcomes for younger children (e.g., Barrett et al. 1996), which means that the specific CBT techniques from the modifying the family environment category of Sburlati and colleagues’ (2011) model may be more useful with younger children than with adolescents. In fact some interventions for very young children, from age 4 to 8 (Waters, Ford, Wharton, and Cobham 2009) or 4 to 9 (Cartwright-Hatton et al. 2010), do not include the child in the treatment at all; rather the therapist engages only with the parents. Recently, parent-led CBT has been implemented as a low-intensity intervention in which parents are guided through a self-help book to overcome their child’s difficulties with anxiety. This approach has been effective both in the UK (Thirlwall et al. 2013) and in rural Australian settings (Lyneham and Rapee 2006). It is notable, however, that, when it comes to parent-led CBT like this, Creswell and colleagues (2010) found that poorer outcomes were associated with higher levels of anxiety in parents, and Waters and colleagues (2009) found that more families dropped out of treatment when the young person was not included in the treatment sessions. These considerations clearly need to be taken into account by therapists when they make decisions about how and when to include families in treatment in order to optimize outcomes for children and young people. It is worth noting, however, that factors other than the child’s age contribute to whether parental involvement in treatment is going to be advantageous. For instance, parent involvement in treatment enhances outcomes when the child is school-refusing (Heyne et al. 2002), when the child is anxious about separating from caregivers (e.g., Choate, Pincus, Eyberg, and Barlow 2005), or when parents experience high levels of anxiety themselves (e.g., Cobham et al. 1998). Thus, when implementing treatment with younger children, with children who refuse school, and with children who suffer from separation anxiety and/or live in the context of parental anxiety, therapists ought to involve parents in the treatment. The degree of parental involvement varies across treatments packages. While some treatment protocols involve parents in a structured number of sessions (e.g., Curry et al. 2005; Spence et al. 2000; Spence et al. 2011), the majority are flexible in how parents should be involved. When treatment approaches have been evaluated through randomized control trials, the nature of the family’s involvement in therapy has not typically been the main focus of study. Where family involvement in CBT is the main focus of study, the variation in the nature and amount of family involvement across trials is such that it becomes difficult to draw any clear conclusions about who should be involved and how. Common Obstacles to Competent Practice and Methods to Overcome Them There are many factors that can make it difficult to modify the family environment. To begin with, parents can often feel that it is their fault that the young person is expe.riencing difficulties with anxiety or depression, and this can lead to feelings of guilt and shame. They may feel that they are not a good enough parent, feel stigmatized to be seen by a mental health service, and feel judged by other people – family, friends, other parents, and professionals (e.g., Hinshaw 2005). Where there are two parents in a family, it is not uncommon that they will have different and conflicting perspec.tives on how to deal with the young person’s anxiety or low mood, and this can make it difficult for them to use a consistent approach. Where parents are separated or divorced, they may not be willing or able to discuss and agree on a way forward. There may be other family members, such as step-parents or grandparents, who are also very involved in the child’s life but see the problem differently or are unwilling to change the way they deal with things. Teachers at school may also be handling things in a way that inadvertently perpetuates the problem. Families can be in the midst of having to cope with other stressful life events – redundancy, ill health, relationship breakdown, bereavement, financial concerns, or mental health difficulties (Goodman and Gotlib 1999) – and this makes it difficult for parents to find the energy or time to attend sessions or to support the child to develop and practice new strategies and skills outside sessions. Parents may understand the need to support and encourage their child to expose him-/herself to situations (s)he has been regularly avoiding because of anxiety or low mood, but they may struggle to successfully implement strategies due to difficulties in tolerating the child’s negative emotions (Tiwari et al. 2008). Finally, there may be some elements of the young person’s difficulties that are not unpleasant, or may even be beneficial for family members, and therefore become pos.itively reinforced (Choate et al. 2005); for example, having the young person sleeping in the same bed may at times be pleasant for a parent, especially if there is a lack of physical contact at other times, if the parent lacks other intimate relationships, or if this happens in the context of marital difficulties. When families are involved in treatment, it is important that the therapist provides the parents with a clear, understandable rationale for their inclusion. Where diffi.culties are encountered, the therapist needs to attend to them as early as possible. From the beginning, it is crucial that the therapist fosters a collaborative relationship with the family; therapist and family should function as a team in order to make sense of the problem and try out new ways of dealing with it. By adopting a validating, empathic, and curious stance, the therapist can identify any negative or unhelpful thoughts and beliefs held by parents and any parental behaviors that may be maintain.ing the problem and need to be addressed in therapy. However, it is also critical to identify and reinforce what parents are doing that works well, in often very difficult circumstances. When parents feel that they are to blame for the young person’s diffi.culties, it can be helpful if the therapist provides psycho-education about the many factors that contribute to the development and maintenance of anxiety or depression in young people (Hinshaw 2005) and if (s)he makes use of Socratic questioning and open discussion to explore matters further. For families where there are conflicting perspectives about how to manage the young person’s anxiety or depression, it may be necessary to find goals that everyone can agree on. For example, in the case of school refusal, where one parent believes that the child should not have to attend school and should be home-tutored while the other parent believes that attending school is essential for getting a good education, it may be possible to identify a goal based on a shared wish for the young person to receive an education that enables him/her to get the necessary qualifications as well as to have opportunities to develop and maintain social relationships. The therapist may need to engage other family members in order to explore their beliefs, provide psycho-education, and encourage them to behave in ways that promote the young person’s adaptive behavior. The therapist may need to closely attend to parental mental health difficulties by routinely assessing parental anxiety and depression, being proactive in discussing the impact of difficulties on the child, and facilitating and encouraging parents to seek help for themselves. Where parents struggle to implement strategies due to their difficulty in tolerating the child’s distress, they may need support in order to develop a more adaptive view of their child – a view that allows them to recognize the  child’s ability to cope with potential challenges, with appropriate support (e.g., Duncan, Coatsworth, and Greenberg 2009). Finally, where there is evidence that parents may find some elements of the young person’s difficulties ben.eficial, the therapist will need to explore this further through Socratic questioning and problem solving, in order to discover with the parents how they can achieve the same feeling in a more adaptive way (e.g., by having quality time with the young person at other times, or by developing their own social network and interests, separate from the child’s). Summary Factors relating to the family environment play a role in the development and maintenance of anxiety and depressive disorders in children and young people. This is recognized in many empirically supported treatments through the inclusion of specific interventions targeting parental cognitions and behaviors. In this chapter we have illustrated how, in a range of anxiety disorders and depression, clinicians can teach parents strategies for managing their own anxiety or low mood as it relates to their child, how they can identify and modify unrealistically high parental expectations, intervene to improve family communication and conflict resolution, or encourage parents to grant more autonomy, reinforce their child’s more adaptive behaviors and model adaptive behaviors. While these strategies target particular parental processes that appear to be associ.ated with anxiety or depression in children and young people, it is yet to be established that the addition of family components in treatment provides benefit above and beyond individual CBT (Creswell and Cartwright-Hatton 2007). Further specifica.tion of the family processes that maintain emotional disorders in children and young people (such as parental psychopathology and parental behaviors) are likely to lead to more clearly defined family interventions. Factors such as symptom severity, comor.bidity, specific diagnoses (of the young person and, where relevant, of the parent(s)) may be important to consider in order to clarify at whom family-based interventions should be targeted. References Asarnow, Joan R., Michael J. Goldstein, Martha Tompson, and Donald Guthrie. 1993. “One-Year Outcomes of Depressive Disorders in Child Psychiatric Inpatients: Evalu.ation of the Prognostic Power of a Brief Measure of Expressed Emotion.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 34: 129–37. DOI: 10.1111/ j.1469-7610.1993.tb00975.x Barber, Brian K. 1996. “Parental Psychological Control: Revisiting a Neglected Construct.” Child Development, 67 (6): 3296–319. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.1996.tb01915.x Barrett, Paula M., Alison Shortt, and Lara Healy. 2002. “Do Parent and Child Behaviors Differentiate Families Whose Children Have Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder from Other Clinic and Non-Clinic Families?” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43: 597–607. DOI: 10.1111/1469-7610.00049 Barrett, Paula M., Ronald M. Rapee, Mark R. Dadds, and Sharon M. Ryan. 1996. “Family Enhancement of Cognitive Style in Anxious and Aggressive Children.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 24: 187–203. DOI: 10.1007/BF01441484 Beck, Aaron T. 1976. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: International Universities Press. Beidel, Deborah C., Samuel M. Turner, and Tracy L. Morris. 1998. SET-C: Social Effectiveness Therapy for Children and Adolescents. Unpublished manuscript. Birmaher, Boris. 2011. “Remission of a Mother’s Depression Is Associated with Her Child’s Mental Health.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 563–5. DOI: 10.1176/appi. ajp.2011.11020305 Brent, David A., and Kimberly Poling. 1997. Cognitive Therapy Treatment Manual for Depressed and Suicidal Youth. Pittsburgh, CA: University of Pittsburgh, Services for Teens at Risk. Cartwright-Hatton, Sam, Ben Laskey, Stewart Rust, and Deborah McNally. 2010. From Timid to Tiger: A Treatment Manual for Parenting the Anxious Child. Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell. Choate, Molly, L., Donna B. Pincus, Sheila M. Eyberg, and David H. Barlow. 2005. “Parent– Child Interaction Therapy for Treatment of Separation Anxiety Disorder in Young Children: A Pilot Study.” Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12: 126–35. Clarke, Gregory N., Peter M. Lewinsohn, and Hyman Hops. 1990. Leader’s Manual for Adolescent Groups: Coping with Depression Course. Portland, OR: Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research. Clarke, Gregory N., Paul Rhode, Peter M. Lewinsohn, Hyman Hops, and John R. Seeley. 1999. “Cognitive–Behavioral Treatment of Adolescent Depression: Efficacy of Acute Group Treatment and Booster Sessions.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38: 272–9. Cobham, Vanessa E., Susan H. Spence, and Mark R. Dadds. 1998. “The Role of Parental Anxiety in the Treatment of Childhood Anxiety.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66: 893–905. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.66.6.893 Cole, David A., and Lynn P. Rehm. 1986. “Family Interaction Patterns and Childhood Depression.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 14: 297–314. DOI: 10.1007/ BF00915448 Conte, Jon R., and John R. Schuerman. 1987. “Factors Associated with an Increased Impact of Child Sexual Abuse.” Child Abuse and Neglect, 11: 201–11. DOI: 10.1016/0145-2134 Cooper, Peter J., Catherine Gallop, Lucy Willetts, and Cathy Creswell. 2008. “Treatment Response in Child Anxiety Is Differentially Related to the Form of Maternal Anxiety Disorder.” Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36: 41–8. Cooper, Peter J., Vanessa Fearn, Lucy Willetts, Hannah Seabrook, and Monika Parkinson. 2006. “Affective Disorder in the Parents of a Clinic Sample of Children with Anxiety Disorders.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 93: 205–12. Creswell, Cathy, and Sam Cartwright-Hatton. 2007. “Family Treatment of Child Anxiety: Outcomes, Limitations and Future direction.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology, 10: 232–52. DOI: 10.1007/s10567-007-0019-3 Creswell, Cathy, Frances Hentges, Monika Parkinson, Paul Sheffield, Lucy Willetts, and Peter Cooper. 2010. “Feasibility of Guided Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT) Self-Help for Childhood Anxiety Disorders in Primary Care.” Mental Health in Family Medicine, 7: 49–57. Creswell, Cathy, Adela Apetroaia, Lynne Murray, and Peter Cooper. 2012. “Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Characteristics of Mothers with Anxiety Disorders in the Context of Child Anxiety Disorder.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121: 26–38. DOI: 10.1037/ a0029516 Creswell, Cathy, Lynne Murray, Stacey James, and Peter Cooper. 2011. “Parenting and Child Anxiety.” In Wendy K. Silverman and Andy P. Field (Eds.), Anxiety Disorders in Children and Adolescents (pp. 299–322). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Curry, John F., Karen C. Wells, David A. Brent, Gregory N. Clarke, Paul Rohde, Anne Marie Albano, … John S. March. 2005. Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Cognitive Behavior Therapy Manual: Introduction, Rationale, and Adolescent Sessions. Durham, NC: Duke University Medical Center, The TADS Team. De Rosnay, Marc, Peter J. Cooper, Nicholas Tsigaras, and Lynne Murray. 2006. “Transmis.sion of Social Anxiety from Mother to Infant: An Experimental Study Using a Social Referencing Paradigm.” Behavior Research and Therapy, 44: 1165–75. DOI: 10.1016/j. brat.2005.09.003 de Wilde, Alice, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2008. “Do Controlling Maternal Behaviours Increase State Anxiety in Children’s Responses to a Social Threat? A Pilot Study.” Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 39: 526–37. DOI: 10.1016/j. jbtep.2007.10.011 Deblinger, Esther, and Anne Hope Heflin. 1996. Treating Sexually Abused Children and Their Nonoffending Parents. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Derisley, Jo, Sarah Libby, Sarah Clarke, and Shirley Reynolds. 2005. “Mental Health, Coping and Family-Functioning in Parents of Young People with Obsessive–Compulsive Disor.der and with Anxiety Disorders.” British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44: 439–44. DOI: 10.1348/014466505X29152 Duncan, Larissa J., J. Douglas Coatsworth, and Mark T. Greenberg. 2009. “Pilot Study to Gauge Acceptability of a Mindfulness-Based, Family-Focused Preventive Intervention.” Journal of Primary Prevention, 30: 605–18. DOI: 10.1007/s10935-009-0185-9 Ehrmantrout, Nikki, Nicholas B. Allen, Craig Leve, Betsy Davis, and Lisa Sheeber. 2011. “Adolescent Recognition of Parental Affect: Influence of Depressive Symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120: 628–34. DOI: 10.1037/a0022500 Eley, Thalia C., Jennifer L. Hudson, Cathy Creswell, Maria Tropeano, Kathryn J. Lester, Peter Cooper, … David A. Collier. 2011. “Therapygenetics: The 5HT.TLPR and Response to Psychological Therapy.” Molecular Psychiatry, 17: 236–7. DOI: 10.1038/mp.2011.132 Everson, Mark D., Wanda M. Hunter, Desmond K. Runyon, Gail A. Edelsohn, and Martha L. Coulter. 1989. “Maternal Support following Disclosure of Incest.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 59 (2): 197–207. DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-0025.1989.tb01651.x Gerull, Friederike C., and Ronald M. Rapee. 2002. “Mother Knows Best: Effects of Maternal Modelling on the Acquisition of Fear and Avoidance Behaviour in Toddlers.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40: 279–87. DOI: 10.1016/S0005-7967(01)00013-4 Goodman, Sherryl H., and Ian H. Gotlib. 1999. “Risk for Psychopathology in the Children of Depressed Mothers: A Developmental Model for Understanding Mechanisms of Trans.mission.” Psychological Review, 106: 458–90. DOI: 10.1037/0033-295X.106.3.458 Gotlib, Ian H., and Constance L. Hammen. 1992. Psychological Aspects of Depression: Toward a Cognitive–Interpersonal Integration. Chichester, Englans: Wiley. Grant, Kathryn E., Bruce E. Compas, Audrey E. Thurm, Susan D. McMahon, and Polly Y. Gipson. 2004. “Stressors and Child and Adolescent Psychopathology: Measurement Issues and Prospective Effects.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 33: 412–25. DOI: 10.1207/s15374424jccp3302_23 Greenberger, Ellen, Chuansheng S. Chen, Steven R. Tally, and Qi Dong. 2000. “Family, Peer, and Individual Correlates of Depressive Symptomatology among US and Chinese Adolescents.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68 (2): 209–19. DOI: 10.1037//0022-006X.68.2.209 Hammen, Constance L., David Gordon, Dorli Burge, Adrian Cheri, Carol Jaenicke, and Donald Hiroto. 1987. “Maternal Affective Disorders, Illness, and Stress: Risk for Children’s Psychopathology.” The American Journal of Psychiatry, 144: 736–41. Heyne, David, Neville J. King, Bruce J. Tonge, Stephanie Rollings, Dawn Young, Melinda Pritchard, and Thomas H. Ollendick. 2002. “Evaluation of Child Therapy and Caregiver Training in the Treatment of School Refusal.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41 (6): 687–95. Hinshaw, Stephen P. 2005. The Stigmatization of Mental Illness in Children and Parents: Developmental Issues, Family Concerns, and Research Needs. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46 (7): 714–34. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2005.01456.x Hollander, Eric. 1997. “Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder: The Hidden Epidemic.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58 (suppl. 12): 3–6. Howard, Bonnie, Brian C. Chu, Amy L. Krain, Abbe L. Marrs-Garcia, and Philip C. Kend.all. 2000. Cognitive–Behavioral Family Therapy for Anxious Children: Therapist Manual (2nd ed.). Ardmore, PA: Workbook. Hudson, Jennifer L., and Ronald M. Rapee. 2004. “From Anxious Temperament to Disorder: An Etiological Model of Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” In Richard G. Heimberg, Cyn.thia L. Turk, and Douglas S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Advances in Research and Practice (pp. 51–74). New York: Guilford Press. Joiner, Thomas, James C. Coyne, and Janice Blalock. 1999. “On the Interpersonal Nature of Depression: Overview and Synthesis.” In Thomas Joiner and James C. Coyne (Eds.), The Interactional Nature of Depression: Advances in Interpersonal Approaches (pp. 3–19). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Kaslow, Nadine J., Catherine Gray Deering, and Gary R. Racusin. 1994. “Depressed Chil.dren and Their Families.” Clinical Psychology Review, 14: 39–59. DOI: 10.1016/0272.7358(94)90047-7 Kendall, Phillip C., Muniya Choudhury, Jennifer Hudson, and Alicia Webb. 2002. The C.A.T. Project Workbook for the Cognitive–Behavioral Treatment of Anxious Adolescents (Ages 14–17). Ardmore, PA: Workbook. Kerfoot, Michael, Elizabeth Dyer, Val Harrington, Adrine Woodham, and Richard Harrington. 1996. “Correlates and Short-Term Course of Self-Poisoning in Adolescents.” British Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 38–42. DOI: 10.1192/bjp.168.1.38 Last, Cynthia G., and Cyd C. Strauss. 1989. “Panic Disorder in Children and Adolescents.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 3: 87–95. DOI: 10.1016/0887-6185 Last, Cynthia G., Michel Hersen, Alan Kazdin, Helen Orvaschel, and Sean Perrin. 1991. “Anx.iety Disorders in Children and Their Families.” Archives of General Psychiatry, 48: 928–39. DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.1991.01810340060008 Lewinsohn, Peter M., Gregory N. Clarke, Hyman Hops, and Judy Andrews. 1990. “Cognitive– Behavioral Treatment for Depressed Adolescents.” Behavior Therapy, 21: 385–401. DOI: 10.1016/S0005-7894(05)80353-3 Lyneham, Heidi J., and Ronald M. Rapee. 2006. “Evaluation of Therapist-Supported Parent-Implemented CBT for Anxiety Disorders in Rural Children.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44: 1287–300. DOI: 10/1016/j.brat.2005.09.009 March, John S., and Karen Mulle. 1998. OCD in Children and Adolescents: A Cognitive– Behavioral Treatment Manual. New York: Guilford Press. McLeod, Bryce D., Jeffrey J. Wood, and John R. Weisz. 2007. “Examining the Association between Parenting and Childhood Anxiety: A Meta-Analysis.” Clinical Psychology Review, 27: 155–72. DOI: 10.1016/j/cpr.2006.09.002 Meiser-Stedman, Richard A., William Yule, Tim Dalgleish, Patrick Smith, and Edward Glucksman. 2006. “The Role of the Family in Child and Adolescent Posttraumatic Stress following Attendance at an Emergency Department.” Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 31: 397–402. DOI: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsj005 Murray, Lynne, Peter J. Cooper, Cathy Creswell, Elizabeth Schofield, and Caroline Sack. 2007. “The Effects of Maternal Social Phobia on Mother–Infant Interactions and Infant Social Responsiveness.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48: 45–52. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2006.01657.x Murray, Lynne, Marc DeRosnay, Joanna Pearson, Caroline Bergeron, Elizabeth Schofield, Melanie Royal-Lawson, and Peter J. Cooper. 2008. “Intergenerational Transmission of Maternal Social Anxiety: The Role of the Social Referencing Process.” Child Development, 79: 1049–64. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01175.x Öst, Lars-Göran, and Thomas H. Ollendick. 2001. Manual for One-Session Treatment of Specific Phobias. Unpublished manuscript. Ollendick, Thomas H. (2013). Guidelines for Parent Therapist Competency in One-Session Treatment. Unpublished manuscript. Pincus, Donna B., Jill T. Ehrenreich, and Sara G. Mattis. 2008. Mastery of Anxiety and Panic for Adolescents: Riding the Wave Therapist Guide (Treatments That Work). New York: Oxford University Press. Pineda, Ashley Q., David A. Cole, and Alanna E. Bruce. 2007. “Mother–Adolescent Interactions and Adolescent Depressive Symptoms: A Sequential Analysis.” Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24: 5–19. DOI: 10.1177/0265407507072564 Rapee, Ronald M. 1997. “Potential Role of Childrearing Practices in the Development of Anxiety and Depression.” Clinical Psychology Review, 17: 47–67. DOI: 10.1016/S0272.7358(96)00040-2 Rapee, Ronald M., Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, Viviana Wuthrich, Maree A. Abbot, Jennifer L. Hudson, and Ann Wignall. 2006. The Cool Kids “Chilled” Adolescent Anxiety Program Therapist Manual. Sydney, Australia: Centre for Emotional Health, Mac.quarie University. Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14: 89–109. DOI: 10.1007/s10567-011-0083-6 Schwartz, Orli S., Paul Dudgeon, Lisa B. Sheeber, Marie B. H. Yap, Julian G. Simmons, and Nicholas B. Allen. 2012. “Parental Behaviors During Family Interactions Predict Changes in Depression and Anxiety Symptoms During Adolescence.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 40: 59–71. DOI 10.1007/s10802-011-9542-2 Sheeber, Lisa B., Betsy Davis, Craig Lever, Hyman Hops, and Eilzabeth Tildesley. 2007. “Ado.lescents’ Relationships with Their Mothers and Fathers: Associations with Depressive Dis.order and Subdiagnostic Symptomatology.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116: 144–54. DOI: 10.1037/0021-843X.116.1.144 Smith, Patrick, Sean Perrin, Willian Yule, and Sophia Rabe-Hesketh. 2001. “War Exposure and Maternal Reactions in the Psychological Adjustment of Children from Bosnia-Hercegovina.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 42: 395–404. Southam-Gerow, Michael A., Philip C. Kendall, and V. Robin Weersing. 2001. “Examining Outcome Variability: Correlates of Treatment Response in a Child and Adolescent Anxiety Clinic.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 30: 422–36. DOI: 10.1207/ S15374424JCCP3003_13 Spence, Susan H., Caroline Donovan, and Margaret Brechman-Toussaint. 2000. “The Treatment of Childhood Social Phobia: The Effectiveness of a Social Skills Training-Based, Cognitive–Behavioural Intervention, with and without Parental Involvement.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41: 713–26. DOI: 10.1111/1469-7610.00659 Spence, Susan H., Caroline L. Donovan, Sonja March, Amanda Gamble, Renee E. Anderson, Samantha Prosser, and Justin Kenardy. 2011. “A Randomized Controlled Trial of Online versus Clinic-Based CBT for Adolescent Anxiety.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79: 629–42. DOI: 10.1037/a0024512 Stark, Kevin D., Laura Lynn Humphrey, Kim Crook, and Kay Lewis. 1990. “Perceived Family Environments of Depressed and Anxious Children: Child’s and Maternal Figure’s Perspec.tives.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 18, 527–47. DOI: 10.1007/BF00911106 Stein, Daniel, Douglas E. Williamson, Boris Birmaher, David A. Brent, Joan Kaufman, Ronald E. Dahl, James M. Perel, and Neal D. Ryan. 2000. “Parent–Child Bonding and Family Functioning in Depressed Children and Children at High Risk and Low Risk for Future Depression.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39: 1387–95. DOI: 10.1097/00004583-200011000-00013 Stobie, Blake, Tracey Taylor, Alexandra Quigley, Sandra Ewing, and Paul M. Salkovskis. 2007. “‘Contents May Vary’: A Pilot Study of Treatment Histories of OCD Patients.” Cognitive and Behavioural Psychotherapy, 35: 273–82: DOI: 10.1017/S135246580700358X Thirlwall, Kerstin, and Cathy Creswell. 2010. “The Impact of Maternal Control on Children’s Anxious Cognitions, Behaviour and Affect: An Experimental Study.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48: D1041–46. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2010.05.030 Thirlwall, Kerstin, Peter J. Cooper, Jessica Karalus, Merryn Voysey, Lucy Willetts, and Cathy Creswell. 2013. “Treatment of Child Anxiety Disorders via Guided Parent-Delivered Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy: Randomised Controlled Trial.” The British Journal of Psychiatry. DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.126698 Tiwari, Shilpee, Jennifer C. Podell, Erin D. Martin, Matt P. Mychailyszyn, Jami M. Furr, and Philip C. Kendall. 2008. “Experiential Avoidance in the Parenting of Anxious Youth: The.ory, Research and Future Directions.” Cognition and Emotion, 22 (3): 480–96. DOI: 10.1080/02699930801886599 Waite, Polly, and Tim Williams (Eds.). 2009. CBT with Children, Adolescents and Families: Cognitive Behavioral Approaches and Interventions for Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. London: Taylor Francis. Waite, Polly, Catherine Gallop, and Linda Atkinson. 2009. “Planning and Carrying Out Treatment.” In Polly Waite and Tim Williams (Eds.), CBT with Children, Adolescents and Families: Cognitive Behavioral Approaches and Interventions for Obsessive Compulsive Dis.order (pp. 51–76). London: Taylor Francis. Waters, Allison M., Louise A. Ford, Trisha A. Wharton, and Vanessa E. Cobham. 2009. “Cognitive–Behavioural Therapy for Young Children with Anxiety Disorders: Comparison of a Child + Parent Condition versus a Parent Only Condition. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47: 654–62. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2009.04.008 Webster-Stratton, Carolyn. 1984. “Randomized Trial of Two Parent-Training Programs for Families with Conduct-Disordered Children.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52: 666–70. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.52.4.666 Weissman, Myrna M., Daniel J. Pilowsky, Priya J. Wickramaratne, Ardesheer Talati, Stephen R. Wisniewski, Maurizio Fava, … A. John Rush. 2006. “Remissions in Maternal Depression and Child Psychopathology: A STAR*D-Child Report.” The Journal of the American Medical Association, 295: 1389–1398. DOI: 10.1001/jama.295.12.1389 Wickramaratne, Priya, Marc J. Gameroff, Daniel J. Pilowsky, Carroll W. Hughes, Judy Garber, Erin Malloy, … Myrna M. Weissman. 2011. “Children of Depressed Mothers 1 Year after Remission of Maternal Depression: Findings from the STAR*D-Child Study.” The American Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 593–602. DOI: 10.1176/appi. ajp.2010.10010032 Wolmer, Leo, Nathaniel Laor, Avner Gershon, Linda C. Mayes, and Donald Cohen. 2000. “The Mother–Child Dyad Facing Trauma: A Developmental Outlook.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 188: 409–15. Wood, Jeffrey J., Bryce D. McLeod, Marian Sigman, Wei-Chin Hwang, and Brian C. Chu. 2003. “Parenting and Childhood Anxiety: Theory, Empirical Findings, and Future Directions.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44: 134–51. 