4 Professional Evidence-Based Practice with Children and Adolescents Rinad S. Beidas, Matthew Ditty, Margaret Mary Downey, and Julie Edmunds Introduction Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011) have outlined a model of therapist competencies for the cognitive behavioral treatment (CBT) of pediatric anxiety and depressive disorders. CBT for these disorders is considered an evidence-based practice (EBP) given the significant empirical evidence it has garnered from randomized controlled trials. The authors have delineated three main categories of competencies: (i) generic therapeutic competencies (e.g., practicing professionally); (ii) CBT compe.tencies (e.g., collaboratively conducting CBT sessions); and (iii) specific CBT techniques (e.g., changing maladaptive behaviors). These categories contribute to a deeper under.standing of what competencies and techniques are necessary for appropriate delivery of CBT for pediatric anxiety and depressive disorders, which assists in closing the chasm between research and practice. This chapter describes generic therapeutic competencies related to professional practice that are relevant to CBT for pediatric anxiety and depres.sive disorders. The specific sub-competencies that fall under practicing professionally are outlined in Box 4.1. Key Features of Competencies Attitudes and ability to utilize research The first aspect to professional practice as delineated by Sburlati and colleagues (2011) includes open and positive attitudes toward EBPs and the ability to access, evaluate, and apply research to inform practice. Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Box 4.1 Practicing professionally  Possession of an open attitude toward psychotherapy research, and the ability to access, critically evaluate, and utilize this research to inform practice.  Knowledge of and ability to operate within professional, ethical, and legal codes of conduct relevant to working with children and adolescents and their families (e.g., providing a duty of care).  Ability to actively participate in supervision. Source: Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee (2011, p. 94). Attitudes The importance of therapists’ attitudes has long been recognized in the professional practice of evidence-based treatments. Early research identified the role of individual therapists’ attitudes in the dissemination and implementation of EBPs (Aarons 2004), and subsequently a number of studies surveyed therapist attitudes toward EBPs. One study found that therapists held favorable attitudes toward EBPs (Najavits, Weiss, Shaw, and Dierberger 2000) whereas another found that therapists held largely unfa.vorable attitudes toward EBPs (Addis and Krasnow 2000). One potential explanation for these conflicting results refers to therapist theoretical orientation. In the first study participants identified themselves as cognitive behavioral, the modality that has argu.ably received the greatest support in the EBP movement. In the second study a number of theoretical orientations were surveyed. Another potential explanation may be clinical experience. Therapists at an earlier stage in their careers may hold more favorable attitudes toward EBPs than therapists who are at a later stage (Aarons 2004). This may be due to increasing emphasis on training in EBP in graduate pro.grams, or to more openness to varying viewpoints before identifying with a particular theoretical orientation. An early interest in therapist attitudes led to the development of the now widely used Evidence-Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS), a 15-item psychometrically validated questionnaire that assesses participants’ attitudes toward the adoption and implementation of EBP via four subscales: appeal, requirements, openness, and diver.gence (Aarons 2004). Appeal refers to the extent to which a therapist will adopt a new practice if it is intuitively appealing. Requirements refer to the extent to which a therapist will adopt a new practice if it is required by his or her organization. Openness is the extent to which a therapist is generally receptive to using new interventions. Divergence is the extent to which a therapist perceives research-based treatments as lacking clinical utility. Given that positive attitudes toward EBPs predict the use of such practices (Nelson and Steele 2007), we recommend two ways supervisors can work to increase the likelihood that trainees will have more positive attitudes toward EBPs. First, we rec.ommend that supervisors assess these attitudes regularly, in order to facilitate an open overall attitude toward psychotherapy research. In addition, the evidence suggests that training in EBPs may be associated with a greater appreciation of the value of evidence-based interventions (Beidas and Kendall 2010). It is likely that regularly monitoring openness and other attitudes toward EBPs, while providing feedback to trainees, will increase openness and diminish negative attitudes. Second, the delivery mode impacts the way EBP information is perceived by therapists. For example, providing a research summary of the most appropriate EBP alongside a case study increases the likelihood that a therapist will use an EBP rather than relying soley upon clinical experience (Stewart and Chambless 2007), so this could be a potential strategy used in supervision to modify attitudes and improve utilization of EBPs. Evidence consumers Having an open attitude toward EBPs is likely necessary, but not sufficient for the suc.cessful implementation of EBPs. Another critical competency for therapists to master and for supervisors to foster is that of being “evidence consumers” (Spring 2007), which refers to the ability to identify, evaluate, and utilize research evidence to engage in evidence-based decision-making regarding treatment for individual clients. The pro.cess of being an evidence consumer is comprised of five steps, each of which is a sepa.rate skill necessary for evidence-based decision-making (Spring 2007). These steps are: ask the clinical question, acquire the evidence, appraise the evidence, apply the results, and assess the outcomes (Strauss, Richardson, Glasziou, and Haynes 2005). To develop as an evidence consumer, therapists must have the ability to identify, evaluate, and utilize resources so as to stay current with innovations and EBPs. Given the rapid proliferation of interest in EBPs, new resources are continuously being added that can guide therapists in the use of CBT for youth anxiety and depressive disorders. To keep abreast of the latest innovations for patient care, therapists can access websites such as http://www.nrepp.samhsa.gov/, http://www.effectivechild.therapy.com/, and http://www.iapt.nhs.uk/. Further, a number of online free training opportunities on how to provide EBPs are available (e.g., http://tfcbt.musc. edu/). These are just a few of many resources available on the internet. Therapists should learn how to find such resources, as new websites and resources constantly emerge and older material becomes outdated. To give an example of engaging in decision-making as an evidence consumer, ima.gine a therapist who meets with a new patient. She is a 12-year-old African American female with symptoms of anxiety in relation to an experienced trauma, as well as with some unrelated obsessions and compulsions. The first step, following evidence-based assessment, is to ask the clinical question, which in this case might be: “What inter.ventions have empirical evidence supporting efficacy or effectiveness with African American youth with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD)?” The next step would be to acquire the evidence. One could visit a website such as http://www.effectivechildtherapy.com/ or PubMed, PsycInfo, or Google Scholar to search for treatment outcome trials. If a therapist searched for the terms “youth,” “PTSD,” and/or “OCD” together with the phrase “treatment out.come,” a number of studies documenting EBPs for these presenting difficulties would emerge (e.g., trauma focused-CBT; TF-CBT, exposure with response prevention). The therapist might also include the phrase “ethnic minority,” to check whether any studies have examined differential treatment outcome response based on ethnicity and/or race. After conducting this review, the therapist would need to appraise the evidence on the basis of the quality of the studies that were found. Typically, randomized controlled trials are considered the gold standard with regard to deter.mining efficacy of interventions. In step 4, the therapist applies the results to the youth s/he is working with. In this case, the therapist would determine the primary disorder and begin there. For example, if the PTSD symptoms were primary, the ther.apist would start with TF-CBT and then move on to the OCD symptoms with exposure and response prevention. In the final step, the therapist would assess out.comes. In this case, administering self-report rating scales and tracking symptoms before, during, and after treatment would be important steps in the EBP process. Operating within professional, ethical, and legal codes Professional practice In addition to having an open attitude and acting as an evidence consumer, professional competence involves awareness of other aspects of one’s own behavior, appearance, and communication style. Many of these attributes are not specified in CBT treatment manuals, yet they potentially impact the provision of effective care. Inappropriate self-disclosures, offensive language, messy office space, chronic lateness, inappropriate physical contact, or disrespectful attitudes toward colleagues could have similarly neg.ative impact. Avoiding such behaviors requires introspection and judgment based on each client and context. For example, professional dress may differ greatly between agencies and according to the function of the worker. Appropriate boundaries can vary across cultural contexts. Not all behaviors pertinent to professionalism can be outlined here, yet consideration of them must not be ignored, given their potential impact on clinician effectiveness. Luckily, several attempts to outline succinct yet exhaustive lists of core generic professional competencies have been undertaken by organizations such as the American Psychological Association (APA), the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE), and the British Psychological Society (BPS). The “Competency Benchmarks Document” provides a particularly extensive resource for the APA (Fouad et al. 2009). The “Educational Policy 2.1” (Council on Social Work Education 2008) and the “Required Competencies Mapping Document for Doctoral Programmes in Clinical Psychology” (British Psychology Association, n.d.) similarly outline each organization’s behavioral expectations of professionals. While designed for academic use, such documents can be used as checklists for clinicians to consider the broad array of competencies necessary for professional practice, and each reference can easily be located with the help of an internet search. Further, supervisors can use these checklists to provide feedback to trainees about their professional practice. Ethical practice All three documents described above discuss ethics as a vital aspect of professional competence. Professional organizations such as the APA, the BPS, the Australian Psychological Society, the European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations, and the International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) have formal ethical codes. Most include professionalism and evidence utilization in their definitions of ethical competence, while urging clinicians to respect and uphold human rights. Given the differences between nations and professions, all clinicians must be familiar with and abide by their respective professional organization’s ethics code. Legal practice Professional competence also encompasses the ability to operate within legal parame.ters. Particularly relevant concerns for clinicians working with children are informed consent, privacy, and mandatory reporting. The specifics of these, such as the age at which a child can legally consent to treatment, what information a parent is entitled to, and the legal definition of abuse vary between countries and states. Clinicians must be aware of the laws to the best of their ability. However, knowing every local statute can be challenging, as laws are often difficult to locate and interpret, especially for clinicians lacking legal training. Therefore an important aspect of legal competence is connecting with helpful resources. Most of the professional organizations previously mentioned offer online guidelines and telephone assistance in legal matters for their members. Some clinical settings have their own attorney or knowledgeable individuals available for consultation. Supervisors can help guide clinicians to locate such resources as part of their training. Supervision/consultation A number of literature reviews (Beidas and Kendall 2010; Herschell, Kolko, Baumann, and Davis 2010; Rakovshik and McManus 2010) have suggested the importance of ongoing support in the form of supervision and/or consultation as a critical compo.nent in training therapists. We will use “consultation” as an umbrella term, to encom.pass the numerous others used for ongoing support – for instance supervision, coaching, and audit with feedback (Edmunds, Beidas, and Kendall 2013). Emerging empirical literature has demonstrated that the number of hours spent in consultation after training predicts therapist fidelity, above and beyond the type of training method (Beidas, Edmunds, Marcus, and Kendall 2012). Therapist fidelity involves adherence to an EBP – in other words, use of specified procedures – and competence in delivery – that is, skill (Perepletchikova, Treat, and Kazdin 2007). Thus a critical competency for therapists at all levels is to seek out and participate in regular consultation. This is required from trainees prior to licensure, but it is also a competency therapists of all levels must display, particularly when faced with a difficult case or a difficulty that presents itself outside of their competence area and where referrals are not possible (American Psychological Association 2002). Consultation’s mechanism of change is unknown, but it likely provides therapists with a venue for clarification and experien.tial practice with concepts, massed practice, case consultation, and problem solving of implementation barriers. One model of mental health consultation is a useful framework for categorizing the varying types of consultation (Caplan and Caplan 1993). Four types of consultation can be provided, although a consultant–consultee relationship may encompass all four types. In type 1 consultation the client is the target. This type (client-centered case consultation) involves the consultant’s expert assessment of the client’s problem, treatment recommendations, and other support included in the provision of client care. Type 2 (consultee-centered case consultation) targets the consultee’s professional functioning and involves identifying and remedying consultee difficulties, such as a therapist’s development of a skill. Type 3 consultation (program-centered admini.strative consultation) provides support and an effective course of action for program implementation; a treatment developer working with an agency to implement an EBP would fall in this category. Type 4 consultation (consultee-centered administrative consultation) targets difficulties or barriers encountered by consultees when imple.menting a new program. When one is specifically applying CBT on youth anxiety and depressive disorders, ongoing support and consultation from peers and experts is critical. This is especially true for novices – that is, trainees who are new to the implementation of CBT. For example, when one is learning exposure procedures, a core ingredient of CBT for child anxiety, consultation is critical due to the heightened anxiety produced in both child and therapist and to the considerable skill required to perform the procedure (exposure is discussed in detail in Chapter 14). For example, during one of my first cases, I – Rinad Beidas – selected an exposure that was too difficult for my client, who was just starting to tackle the challenges listed on his fear hierarchy. He was to take an elevator by himself to another floor, to find a prize, and then come back to me. He forgot how to get back to the clinic’s floor, and I could hear him crying in the elevator. I tried to model for him that I coped with the anxiety of not knowing where he was, when he eventually found the correct floor; but the episode certainly elicited a large amount of anxiety in us both. Without debriefing and support from my supervisor, I may have never attempted another exposure! Consultation is also beneficial for those more advanced in their career who seek to refine their skills, work with difficult cases, and expand areas of expertise. For example, if an anxiety expert began working with a severely depressed patient, consultation on CBT for depression would be the recom.mended and most ethical course of action. Competence in Treating the Anxiety Disorders and Depression The competencies discussed in this chapter are nonspecific and apply equally to both anxiety and depressive disorders. Competence in treating both children and adolescents The generic competencies outlined so far must also be developmentally appropriate. For example, the process of becoming an evidence consumer requires careful consideration of a client’s age and maturity when one is searching for evidence, as a treatment of teenagers that has a strong empirical base may be ineffective for 6-year.olds. When a treatment lacks age-relevant evidence, therapists must determine whether and how to adopt or adapt treatment protocol so as to ensure developmentally appropriate care. Unfortunately, little is known about how to modify treatments for effective use across developmental stages (Holmbeck, Devine, and Bruno 2010). Therefore therapists must stay current with developmental literature in order to adapt EBPs for particular age groups. Developmental considerations should also be made when engaging in alliance building, assessment, and other professional competencies. Clinicians must be able to set the stage for effective care by engaging minors in developmentally appropriate ways (Kingery et al. 2006). Offices filled with toys may foster a therapeutic alliance with young children while deterring teens. Employment of complex language may communicate respect for teens while confusing small children. All clinicians working with children and adolescents must possess a basic understanding of how to best communicate with them. Because age and development also determine a client’s decision-making ability, matu.rity, and legal status, such considerations directly impact professional competence when one is obtaining informed consent and determining the optimal degree of caregiver involvement. For example, the adult caregivers of many minors may best be conceptual.ized as co-clients, whose involvement is required beyond the consenting process (Koocher and Daniel 2012). Older adolescents are also known to take risks with sub.stance use, bullying, sexual activity, and criminal behavior. In addition to the need to understand laws of mandatory reporting, determining who is entitled to what information presents the challenge that one has to balance confidentiality with an ethical responsi.bility to clients who lack maturity (Koocher and Daniel 2012). Given the complexities and responsibilities involved in child and adolescent treatment, as well as the current gaps in the evidence available for every nuanced scenario, therapy with minors particu.larly requires regular and intensive consultation with individuals who have expertise in dealing with relevant age groups. Chapter 5 offers a broader discussion of develop.mental considerations in child and adolescent therapy, and Chapter 6 gives more details about engaging in and developing a therapeutic alliance within this kind of therapy. Common Obstacles to Competent Practice and Methods to Overcome Them Obstacles to favorable attitudes toward EBPs Experience is more valuable than evidence For over fifty years, psychologists have wrestled with the debate over which method is more effective at predicting patient outcomes, clinical judgment, or statistical algo.rithms and research-based evidence. Dr. Paul Meehl’s (1954) Clinical Versus Statistical Prediction sparked controversy by declaring that statistical algorithms were more accu.rate about predicting behavior than clinical judgment. Psychologists are still wrestling with this assertion, and particularly with the last decade’s EBP movement, which pro.motes the use of manualized treatments that are based upon research evidence (Kendall and Beidas 2007). Even as the catalogue of EBPs expands, it can still take up to 17 years for a treatment to move from research to practice (Balas and Boren 2000). Clinicians’ belief that experience is more valuable than evidence remains an obstacle, as many are skeptical of research-based models that seek to summarize the deeply personal, experiential nature of a disorder and its treatment (e.g., anxiety) into a manualized treatment (Addis, Wade, and Hatgis 1999; Stiles 2006). Recent qualitative data dem.onstrate this perspective, as some clinicians report difficulties in trusting research-based evidence and perceive the manipulated conditions and the exclusion criteria of clinical trials – for example, the exclusion of children with comorbid externalizing disorders when one tests a treatment for internalizing disorders – as lacking in generalizability: the settings of these trials cannot be generalized (Nelson, Steele, and Mize 2006). The belief that experience overrides evidence can be illustrated through the example of CBT for child anxiety. CBT is now widely identified as an EBP for youth anxiety (Silverman, Pina, and Viswesvaran 2008), yet some community therapists have expressed concerns that CBT may not be appropriate for anxious youth in community settings. The literature indicates that there may be some differences between anxious youth who come for treatment to a research clinic and anxious youth who come for treatment to a community clinic. Although youth in community settings are similar to youth in research settings with regard to symptoms and diagnoses, they are more likely to belong to ethnic minorities and to have lower family incomes (Ehrenreich-May et al. 2011; Southam-Gerow, Silverman, and Kendall 2006). However, a recent meta-analysis found that EBPs such as CBT for child anxiety can, without significant modifications, remain efficacious in addressing the needs of ethnic minority youth (Huey and Polo 2008). Thus, despite differences between anxious youth in research and in community settings, evidence suggests that CBT remains the optimal EBP of choice for both. Attitudes toward manualized treatment Although guidelines in the use of EBPs carefully highlight the importance of taking into account the best evidence, clinical judgment, and patient preferences, many ther.apists conflate the use of EBPs with strict adherence to a manualized treatment (American Psychological Association 2006). Attitudes toward manualized EBPs include a number of concerns regarding a perceived inflexibility, a lack of attention to the therapeutic alliance, and a perceived “coldness” of approach, where technique is emphasized over care (Addis and Krasnow 2000; Borntrager, Chorpita, Higa-McMillan, and Weisz 2009; Castonguay, Goldfried, Wiser, Raue, and Hayes 1996). Given data demonstrating that strict adherence can negatively impact therapeutic alli.ance (Castonguay et al. 1996), we suggest flexibility within fidelity (Kendall and Beidas 2007), which gives clinicians freedom from rigidly following manuals at the expense of responding creatively. Adaptation or “flexibility within fidelity” is an important means to overcome obsta.cles related to clinician attitudes toward EBPs. Flexibility within fidelity refers to maintaining high treatment integrity while also individualizing the treatment to the particular client and his or her context. For example, a clinician working with an anx.ious youth with secondary depressive symptoms would integrate components of CBT for depression (e.g., cognitive restructuring for anxious and depressive thoughts, behavioral activation; Beidas, Benjamin, Puleo, Edmunds, and Kendall 2010). CBT for pediatric anxiety and depressive disorders is designed to allow for treatment indi.vidualization for each patient while maintaining fidelity to core components. Relationship between organizational characteristics and provider attitudes A provider’s work setting can influence his or her attitudes toward EBPs (Aarons 2004; Aarons et al. 2012; Nelson et al. 2006). Expectations of behavior, levels of stress, and managerial support are all examples of factors that may make EBP  adoption easier or harder. For example, a high-stress work environment could  overwhelm providers who attempt to learn a new intervention, and this may result in negative attitudes toward EBPs and reluctance to use them. Alternatively, a provider may work in a low-resource setting (say, with poor technology or lack of adequate work space) that makes obtaining manuals or completing exposures essential to EPBs – like CBT for youth anxiety – seem unrealistic. Proficient organizational cultures are those that actively promote client well-being and up-to-date knowledge, and they have the highest levels of EBP adop.tion (Aarons et al. 2012). Resistant organizational cultures are critical, suppressive, and do not expect clinicians to change or to adopt new ways of providing service. Rigid cultures contain clinicians with little decision-making authority, flexibility, or discretion. Interestingly, such contexts were not significantly related to clinician attitudes toward EBPs, which indicates that clinician-level commitment to EBPs and to problem solving may surmount difficult organizational characteristics (Aarons et al. 2012). Obstacles to professional practice Legal considerations Occasionally, legal considerations represent challenges to professional competence. For example, when the client is a child with PTSD and a car-accident survivor, that client may benefit from exposure to riding in an actual car; yet many clinicians are reluctant to drive with a child, due to associated legal risks. To overcome such obstacles, thera.pists may consider creative ways to optimize therapeutic duties while minimizing legal risk, such as imaginal exposures or recruiting a caregiver to drive with the client. Compliance with mandatory reporting can also raise legal barriers to the exercise of professional competence, as real-life scenarios are often complex and difficult to navi.gate. For example, when a client is intensely afraid of reporting abuse, how long (if at all) should a therapist delay filing, in order to ease client concerns and preserve the therapeutic alliance? At what point, if any, does bullying from a peer meet the legal def.inition of abuse? To deflate potential conflicts as much as possible, mandatory report.ing procedures should be clearly articulated at the outset of treatment and, when “gray area” situations are encountered, consultation with legal and therapeutic experts in order to explore creative ways to balance therapeutic and legal duties is imperative. Consent to treatment and privacy issues Obtaining consent and sharing information with caregivers also represent barriers to professional competence when one is working with minors. For example, a set of divorced parents with a divisive relationship may contain a parent reluctant to consent to treatment. To avoid being entangled in parental feuds, clinicians must employ assertiveness skills and obtain legal consent from both parents, while maintaining clear rules and boundaries throughout treatment. Therapists must also mindfully consider the flow of information between all parties and how it will be used. Obstacles to consultation Despite the importance of engaging in consultation in order to improve fidelity (Beidas et al. 2012), clinicians encounter obstacles when accessing and utilizing con.sultation, particularly after they obtain licensure, at which time ongoing support is no longer to be required. Examples of such obstacles are the clinician’s own failure to recognize the need for consultation, the limited time available for it, its high cost, and limited access to consultants. Recognizing the need Clinicians often seek to develop clinical expertise over time. Whereas some clinicians aim to develop expertise in a specific treatment modality or disorder, other clinicians consider themselves generalists and desire competence across a variety of disorders, populations, and modalities. Regardless of the route, all clinicians will encounter cli.ents for whom an optimal treatment is difficult to identify, let alone implement. It is important for clinicians to recognize when consultation is needed and to be willing to ask for it. Lack of openness to feedback may prevent clinicians from seeking such help. Thus it is recommended that clinicians regularly reflect on their ability to implement particular treatments with particular clients and to seek consultation when they encounter an impasse. It is also recommended that clinicians routinely gather stan.dardized data on client progress and that they seek consultation when clients fail to progress or achieve therapy goals; doing so will assist clinicians in reflecting on the ability described above. Time and cost When one is a trainee or a pre-licensed clinician, supervision is a required activity often built into the work week. Once licensure is obtained, consultation can be viewed as valuable, yet it is not something that a clinician can currently bill for. Additional fees can be incurred depending on the financial arrangement with consultants. Nonetheless, it is ethically appropriate for clinicians to carve out time for consultation in order to enhance optimal care. For example, one EBP, dialectical behavior therapy, includes consultation as a required component of competent practice in reducing therapist burnout. Regularly scheduled consultation times are recommended, whether they are weekly, fortnightly, or monthly. Consultation can be scheduled at times that do not interfere with clinical work (e.g., during school hours). In order to overcome costs that may be associated with the payment of consultants, therapists can organize peer consultation partnerships or groups. Another solution is for therapists to lobby for policy change, so that insurance companies may reimburse the consultation time so as to foster improved care. Consultant availability It is possible that a clinician is willing to commit time and money toward consultation but does not have a readily available consultant. One option for addressing this problem is to develop a peer support network, which can take the form of meetings, scheduled either regularly or as needed. Meetings can involve pairs or groups and can occur face to face, via teleconferencing, or in web-conferencing formats (e.g., Beidas et al. 2012; Weingardt, Cucciare, Bellotti, and Lai 2009). Additional options include seeking con.sultation via peer-mediated online discussion boards (Moore and Marra 2005) and via LISTSERV mailing lists of professional organizations (e.g., the Association of Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies). These platforms allow clinicians to post general and specific questions related to de-identified cases and to benefit from the collective wealth of knowledge and expertise of members. Other online learning collaboratives (such as www.practiceground.org) provide opportunities to access materials and set up peer consultation in order to improve competence in delivering EBPs. Conclusion In this chapter we have discussed three sub-competencies gathered under the umbrella of practicing professionally. We have provided behavioral markers, examples of professional practice, strategies to improve upon competency from the supervisor’s and the therapist’s perspective, developmental considerations, and obstacles to achiev.ing each sub-competency. Specifically, we have reviewed the importance of: (i) open attitudes toward psychotherapy research that allow therapists to develop the ability to seek out resources and to become a thoughtful “evidence consumer”; (ii) operation within professional, ethical, and legal codes; and (iii) active participation in ongoing consultation. Although these competencies are likely nonspecific to EBPs, they are absolutely critical for the professional practice of EBPs, particularly in the case of ther.apists practicing CBT on anxiety and depression in youth. References Aarons, Gregory A. 2004. “Mental Health Provider Attitudes toward Adoption of Evidence-Based Practice: The Evidence-Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS).” Mental Health Services Research, 6: 61–74. Aarons, Gregory A., Charles Glisson, Phillip D. Green, Kimberly Hoagwood, Kelly J. Kelleher, and John A. Landsverk. 2012. “The Organizational Social Context of Mental Health Ser.vices and Clinician Attitudes toward Evidence-Based Practice: A United States National Study.” Implementation Science, 7 (1): 56. DOI: 10.1186/1748-5908-7-56 Addis, Michael E., and Aaron D. Krasnow. 2000. “A National Survey of Practicing Psychol.ogists’ Attitudes toward Psychotherapy Treatment Manuals.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68: 331–9. Addis, Michale E., Wendy A. Wade, and Christina Hatgis. 1999. “Barriers to Evidence Based Practices: Addressing Practitioners’ Concerns about Manual Based Psychotherapies.” Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 6: 430–41. American Psychological Association. 2002. APA Ethical principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, http://www.apa.org/ethics/code2002.html (accessed February 20, 2013). American Psychological Association. 2006. “Evidence-Based Practice in Psychology: APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice.” American Psychologist, 61: 271–85. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.61.4.271 Balas, E. Andrew, and Suzanne A. Boren. 2000. Managing Clinical Knowledge for Health Care Improvement. Stuttgart, Germany: Schattauer. Beidas, Rinad S., and Philip C. Kendall. 2010. “Training Therapists in Evidence-Based Prac.tice: A Critical Review of Studies From a Systems-Contextual Perspective.” Clinical Psy.chology: Science and Practice, 17: 1–30. DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-2850.2009.01187.x Beidas, Rinad S., Julie E Edmunds, Steven C. Marcus, and Philip C. Kendall. 2012. “Training and Consultation to Promote Implementation of an Empirically Supported Treatment: A Randomized Trial.” Psychiatric Services, 63: 660–5. DOI: 10.1176/appi.ps.201100401 Beidas, Rinad S., Courtney L. Benjamin, Connor M. Puleo, Julie M. Edmunds, and Philip C. Kendall. 2010. “Flexible Applications of the Coping Cat Program for Anxious Youth.” Cognitve and Behavioral Practice, 17: 142–53. DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2009.11.002 Borntrager, Cameo F., Bruce F. Chorpita, Charmaine Higa-McMillan, and John R. Weisz. 2009. “Provider Attitudes toward Evidence-Based Practices: Are the Concerns with the Evidence or with the Manuals?” Psychiatric Services, 60: 677–81. DOI: 10.1176/appi. ps.60.5.677 British Psychology Association. (n.d.). Required Competencies Mapping Document for Doc.toral Programmes in Clinical Psychology, http://www.bps.org.uk/sites/default/files/ documents/required_competencies_-_counselling_psychology.doc (accessed November 25, 2013). Caplan, Gerald, and Ruth B. Caplan. 1993. Mental Health Consultation and Collaboration. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. Castonguay, Louis G., Marvin R. Goldfried, Susan Wiser, Patrick J. Raue, and Adele M. Hayes. 1996. “Predicting the Effect of Cognitive Therapy for Depression: A Study of Unique and Common Factors.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64: 497–504. Council on Social Work Education. 2008. Educational Policy and Accreditation Standards. Educational Policy, 2 (1): 3–7, http://www.cswe.org/File.aspx?id=13780 (accessed February 20, 2013). Edmunds, Julie E., Rinad S. Beidas, and Philip C. Kendall. 2013. “Dissemination and Imple.mentation of Evidence-Based Practices: Training and Consultation as Implementation Strategies,” http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cpsp.12031/abstract (accessed December 10, 2013). Ehrenreich-May, Jill, Michael A. Southam-Gerow, Shannon E. Hourigan, Lauren R. Wright, Donna B. Pincus, and John R. Weisz. 2011. “Characteristics of Anxious and Depressed Youth Seen in Two Different Clinical Contexts.” Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services, 38: 398–411. DOI: 10.1007/s10488-010-0328-6 Fouad, Nadya A., Catherine L. Gus, Robert L. Hatcher, Nadine J. Kaslow, Philinda S. Hutch.ings, Michael B. Madson, Frank L. Collins, and Raymond E. Crossman. 2009. “Compen.tency Benchmarks: A Developmental Model for Understanding and Measuring Compe.tence in Professional Psychology.” Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 3: S5–S26. Herschell, Amy D., David J. Kolko, Barbara L. Baumann, and Abigail C. Davis. 2010. “The Role of Therapist Training in the Implementation of Psychosocial Treatments: A Review and Critique with Recommendations.” Clinical Psychology Review, 30: 448–66. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.02.005 Holmbeck, Grayson, Katie A. Devine, and Elizabeth F. Bruno. 2010. “Developmental Issues and Considerations in Research and Practice.” In John R. Weisz and Alan E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents (2nd ed., pp. 28–39). New York: Guilford Press. Huey, Stanley J., and Antonio J. Polo. 2008. “Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatments for Ethnic Minority Youth.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 37: 262–301. DOI: 10.1080/15374410701820174 Kendall, Philip C., and Rinad S. Beidas. 2007. “Smoothing the Trail for Dissemination of Evidence-Based Practices for Youth: Flexibility within Fidelity.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 38: 13–20. DOI: 10.1037/0735-7028.38.1.13 Kingery, Julie N., Tami L. Roblek, Cynthia Suveg, Rachel L. Grover, Joel T. Sherrill, and R. Lindsey Bergman. 2006. “They’re Not Just ‘Little Adults’: Developmental Consider.ations for Implementing Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy with Anxious Youth.” Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An Internation Quarterly, 20: 263–73. Koocher, Gerald P., and Jessica H. Daniel. 2012. “Treating Children and Adolescents.” In Samuel J. Knapp (Ed.), APA Handbook of Ethics in Psychology. Volume 2: Practice, Teaching, and Research (pp. 3–14). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Moore, Joi L., and Rose M. Marra (2005). “A Comparative Analysis of Online Discussion Participation Protocols.” Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 38: 191–212. Meehl, Paul E. 1954. Clinical versus Statistical Prediction: A Theoretical Analysis and a Review of the Evidence. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Najavits, Lisa, Roger D. Weiss, Sarah R. Shaw, and Amy Dierberger. 2000. “Psychotherapists’ Views of Manuals.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 31: 404–8. Nelson, Timothy D., and Ric G. Steele. 2007. “Predictors of Practitioner Self-Reported Use of Evidence-Based Practices: Practitioner Training, Clinical Setting, and Attitudes Toward Research.” Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services, 34: 319–30. DOI: 10.1007/s10488-006-0111-x Nelson, Timothy D., Ric G. Steele, and Jennifer A. Mize. 2006. “Practitioner Attitudes toward Evidence-Based Practice: Themes and Challenges.” Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services, 33: 398–409. DOI: 10.1007/s10488-006-0044-4 Perepletchikova, F., Teresa A. Treat, and Alan E. Kazdin. 2007. “Treatment Integrity in Psychotherapy Research: Analysis of the Studies and Examination of the Associated Factors.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 829–41. DOI: 10.1037/ 0022-006X.75.6.829 Rakovshik, Sarah G., and Freda McManus. 2010. “Establishing Evidence-Based Training in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: A Review of Current Empirical Findings and Theoretical Guidance.” Clinical Psychology Review, 30: 496–516. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.03.004 Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14: 89–109. DOI: 10.1007/s10567-011-0083-6 Silverman, Wendy, Armando A. Pina, and Chockalingam Viswesvaran. 2008. “Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatments for Phobic and Anxiety Disorders in Children and Adolescents.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 37: 105–30. DOI: 10.1080/15374410701817907 Southam-Gerow, Michael A., Wendy K. Silverman, and Philip C. Kendall. 2006. “Client Simi.larities and Differences in Two Childhood Anxiety Disorders Research Clinics.” Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35: 528–38. DOI: 10.1207/s15374424jccp3504_4 Spring, Bonnie. 2007. “Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology: What It Is, Why it Matters; What You Need To Know.” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63: 611–31. DOI: 10.1002/jclp.20373 Stewart, Rebecca E., and Dianne L. Chambless. 2007. “Does Psychotherapy Research Inform Treatment Decisions in Private Practice?” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63: 267–81. DOI: 10.1002/jclp.20347 Stiles, William B. 2006. “Case Studies.” In John C. Norcross, Larry E. Beutler, and Ronald F. Levant (Eds.), Evidence-Based Practices in Mental Health: Debate and Dialogue on the Fundamental Questions (pp. 57–73). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Strauss, Sharon E., W. Scott Richardson, Paul Glasziou, and R. Brian Haynes. 2005. Evidence-Based Medicine: How to Practice and Teach EBM (3rd ed.). New York: Elsevier. Weingardt, Kenneth R., Michael A. Cucciare, Christine Bellotti, and Wen Pin Lai. 2009. “A Randomized Trial Comparing Two Models of Web-Based Training in Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy for Substance Abuse Counsellors.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 37 (3): 219–27. DOI: 10.1016/j.jsat.2009.01.002 