9 Case Formulation  and Treatment Planning for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents Heidi J. Lyneham Introduction Case formulation is the process of identifying the causes, antecedents, and maintaining factors related to a client’s emotional, interpersonal, and behavioral problems. It provides a template from which an individualized treatment plan can be derived. Importantly, case formulations are flexible. They account for all the information gathered at any point in time, and they are updated to reflect new information as it arises. The models of anxiety and depression presented in Chapter 8 are nomothetic, that is, they describe the general “laws” of how these problems arise. The purpose of the case formulation is to create an idiographic model relevant only to a specific case. Persons (1989) identifies numerous other functions of a case formulation. First, by ensuring that the therapist understands and communicates the presenting problems within the client’s personal context, it conveys hope that these problem(s) can be addressed. Second, it guides the development of a treatment plan that deliberately targets causal and maintaining factors that underlie the problems, increasing the likelihood of appropriate response to treatment. Third, it can pre-empt potential barriers that may undermine treatment progress or engagement. The treatment plan can subsequently be adjusted to proactively address these potential barriers, decreasing the likelihood that the barrier will interfere with progress. Several different approaches have been devised to guide the production of case formulations (Boschen and Oei 2008; Macneil, Hasty, Conus, and Berk 2012; Persons 1989). Surprisingly, though, there has been minimal research on the clinical utility and accuracy of case formulations and subsequent treatment plans, particu.larly with regard to child and adolescent populations. Inter-rater reliability of Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. case formulations has been found to be adequate (Kuyken, Fothergill, Musa, and Chadwick 2005), the quality of case formulations improving with therapist experience and training (Eells et al. 2011). The clinical utility of case formulation as used in a community setting with adult anxiety and depression has been examined, case-formulated treatment leading to statistically and clinically significant change, comparable to that seen in randomized controlled trials of empirically supported treatments (Persons, Roberts, Zalecki, and Brechwald 2006). Direct comparison of case-formulated treatment and standardized treatment has shown slight superiority for the former (Persons and Tompkins 1997). Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for child anxiety has been shown to be maximally effective when CBT interventions are matched to the specific anxiety symptoms experienced by the individual (Eisen and Silverman 1993, 1998), and long-term efficacy has been established for a majority of individuals after a CBT program for adolescent depression that incorporated use of case formulation (Treatment of Adolescent Depression [TADS] Team 2009). The case-formulation approach has also been shown to improve some aspects of the therapeutic alliance (Chadwick, Williams, and Mackenzie 2003); and client acceptance of a treatment rationale – one aspect of the case formulation – is related to good treatment outcome (see, e.g., Addis and Jacobson 2000). Despite the small amount of research to date, existing results are promising and case formulation is considered by organizations such as the APA to be fundamental to evidence-based practice (APA 2006). The distinct advantage of case formulation for the therapist in community practice is the flexibility it provides in determining a treatment plan for individuals who may or may not fit the criteria on which manual-based approaches were evaluated. Devising a Case Formulation and a Treatment Plan Theoretically driven, context-aware case formulation For the purposes of this chapter, it will be assumed that the therapist has established, through appropriate assessment, that the targeted child or adolescent has an anxiety and/or a depressive disorder that is the basis for presentation to treatment (see Chapter 7 for more details on conducting an assessment). To devise a case formula.tion, a competent therapist will need to add, to the standard diagnostic and symptom severity assessment tools, a targeted assessment of the typical cognitions, behaviors, and emotions that relate to the presenting problem for the individual, as well as an evaluation of interpersonal processes between the individual and other people (e.g., parents, peers) during periods of high anxiety or low mood. This can be achieved by eliciting detailed descriptions of one or two recent events that highlight the presenting concerns and by enquiring about cognitions and behavioral choices during the chosen event(s) from both the perspective of the parent and that of the child or adolescent. Information on comorbidity, family history, current anxiety or depression in immediate family, the client’s developmental and academic func.tioning, and the family’s socio-demographic and cultural environment are also needed for a comprehensive case formulation. Following thorough assessment, the therapist should select the nomothetic model that is appropriate for the presenting individual, his/her family, and the organizational setting in which treatment is being offered. The chosen model will either reflect a particular manualized program or should be drawn from general models of anxiety or depression, such as those provided in Chapter 8. Once the model has been selected, the therapist should attach relevant evidence gathered during assessment to each aspect of the model. For example, Figure 9.1 applies the anxiety model presented in Chapter 8 to the case of an 11-year-old boy assessed as meeting criteria for generalized anxiety disorder and social phobia. As can be seen, a picture emerges from the idiographic model of what is causing and maintaining the presenting problem for the individual. In addition to developing the idiographic representation of the chosen model, the potential impact that socio-demographics, culture, comorbidity, and development will have on engagement with treatment and on the likelihood of experiencing common obstacles during treatment should be considered. These influences can be described within a written case formulation or, if a visual representation of the case formulation is preferred, displayed on the idiographic model as contextual layers that surround the issues identified in the model. Finally, the formulation should consider the strengths of the individual and family, as recognition of these factors not only facilitates an optimistic view of the future, but can provide the therapist with a basis on which (s)he can build resilience (Macneil et al. 2012). These strengths should be added to any written or visual representation of the case formulation in a way that emphasizes their importance – for example they can be added to the outer layer of the contextual–idiographic model. Dynamic Treatment Planning Once an initial case formulation is established, the therapist needs to convert it into a treatment plan. Each child or adolescent will have a unique mix of factors implicated in the development of his/her anxiety and/or depressive disorder. Each factor will also vary on the strength of its association with current problems. Consequently the amount of emphasis given to a particular skill within a treatment plan must also vary. The treatment plan must therefore select the specific CBT techniques that will best address the identified problems, sequence the techniques in such a way that progress toward goals is optimized, and implement each technique at an appropriate dose, to ensure that the targeted problem is effectively overcome or managed. Each of these processes is described below. Selecting specific CBT techniques The competent therapist must ensure that (s)he has a thorough understanding of the purpose of each specific CBT technique, so that (s)he can appropriately link it to the causal or maintaining factor(s) that it is designed to address. Specific CBT techniques may focus on a single factor or may deliberately target multiple factors. Treatment manuals will provide guidance on the selection of appropriate techniques or, through design, Case Formulation and Treatment Planning Demographics and culture • 11-year-boy lives at home with mum (47), dad (47) and sister (9) • 2nd generation Korean Australian family. Parents describe little affiliation with Korean culture although paternal family does push traditional Korean beliefs • Both parents university educated • No concerns raised re health, shelter, resources or education  Development/academics • Milestones met at appropriate times • Academic performance in middle of class (reduction from top 5 in previous school) • Social skills are age-appropriate  Comorbidity • No comorbidity identified • Some subclinical symptoms of depression  Parent emotionality • Both parents are self-described introverts Genetic factors • Mother manages anxiety through problem • Depression in paternal grandfather solving • Generalized anxiety in maternal aunt • Father reports he tends to worry and stress when under pressure only Anxious vulnerability 3 5 Emotional lability 2 • Low tolerance to feeling anxious Environmental support of avoidance 4 • Expectation that mistakes will • Lack of expectation to participate in equal failureage-appropriate events • Common thoughts include “I’ll get into • Both parents provide substantial trouble,” “I can’t do this,” “I’ll look like an reassurance about upcoming events idiot,” and many “what if” questions Avoidant coping 1 Modeling of fear and avoidance • Avoids new situations, making mistakes, being late, grading or evaluation • Parent modeling mostly positive • Engages in checking behaviors• Some modeling of expecting worst to • Seeks reassurance about daily happen routines and “interrogates” parents about new situations 6 Environmental events Factors affecting life interference • Moved to a new suburb, house • Expectations have increased since and school change of school • Did not progress to next swim • No close friendships at new school squad level with existing friends • Mother has changed jobs, which led to less availability to manage daily activities Generalized anxiety disorder – Severe social phobia – Mild  Obstacles • Current experience with teasing at school  Strengths • Both parents and child recognize anxiety is problematic • Good access to cognitions • Family has previously coped with high stress, which was described as “raising to the occasion” • Family members speak respectfully to each other  Selected CBT techniques (in order of emphasis) 1. In vivo exposure (with response prevention) 2. Cognitive restructuring 3. Parent intrusiveness and overprotection 4. Emotion identification, expression and regulation 5. Parental expectations management 6. Friendship skills  Figure 9.1 Example of idiographic application of the anxiety model to the case of an 11-year.old boy. Chosen specific CBT skills are indicated by numerical indicators. Adapted from Figure 8.2, which was adapted from Rapee (2001) and Hudson and Rapee (2004). will have made assumptions about the selection of techniques on the basis of the chosen nomothetic model and the target population. Where a therapist is using a module-based treatment manual, the clinical algorithms provided by the manual should be followed. In situations where treatment is guided by CBT theory and the therapist’s clinical judgment, the sections on clinical implication in Chapter 8 here, together with the reviews provided of each specific CBT technique in Chapters 12 through 19, should be used to guide the selection of appropriate techniques. On the basis of the case formulation, the therapist can overlay what specific CBT techniques will be used to address each component of the case formulation. (For an example of this, see Figure 9.1, where each numerical indicator provides the chosen specific CBT tech.nique that will form the treatment plan.) The competent therapist must remain flexible throughout treatment. The initial case formulation, and consequently the treatment plan, must be updated as new information is discovered and as a result of the experience implementing each specific CBT technique with the client. For example, during the implementation of in-session exposure, it may become apparent that the parent encourages flight from challenging situations at the first sign of the child’s distress, despite having been presented with psycho-education regarding the role of overprotection in child anxiety. The flexible therapist will revise the case formulation or the treatment plan to work directly on the parent’s reactions during exposure, through one-on-one work on his/her beliefs regarding the child’s ability to cope with risk and/or by incorporating reduction of parent involvement directly into the child’s exposure hierarchy. Sequencing selected specific CBT techniques Depending on the manual selected, the therapist may have limited or substantial control on the order of presentation of specific CBT techniques. In manuals where there is limited flexibility in the sequencing of techniques, the presented order reflects the nomothetic understanding of the targeted disorder(s). Therapist flexibility in this case focuses more on the tailoring of the technique to the specific cognitions, behaviors, or situations that the client experiences. In module-based manuals that provide greater flexibility, or in situations where the therapist is working within a general CBT frame.work, the sequence of selected techniques will be guided by the manual’s clinical algorithms (e.g., Chorpita 2007) or will be inferred from the direction and strength of relationships between factors identified in the case formulation. Sequencing selected specific CBT techniques for anxiety disorders Within CBT models and at the diagnostic level, avoidance is key to all forms of anxiety. The specific CBT technique that directly targets avoidance and the only skill that appears without exception in every evidence-based treatment manual for anxiety is exposure. Consequently, after basic psycho-education, exposure would be considered the most essential technique to implement with a child or adolescent who has an anxiety disorder. In determining the sequence of skills for the treatment plan, the therapist may do best to ask him-/herself what skills will be needed prior to implementing exposure and what skills may be developed concurrently with it. For example, successful exposure to social situations in the school playground may not be possible until an underlying deficit in social skills is addressed. Therefore the treatment plan should reflect an early focus on developing basic social skills prior to exposure, as implementation of the newly learnt social skills would improve the likelihood of early success in exposure to social situations. Alternatively, the case formulation may indicate that excessive reassurance from the parent undermines the child’s ability to learn that (s)he can cope with chal.lenging situations. In this case the treatment plan may reflect that, concurrently with the implementation of exposure, the parent would require (i) psycho-education concerning the role of excessive reassurance in his/her child’s evaluation of a situation; (ii) therapist modeling of the appropriate parent management during in-session exposure exercises; and, ultimately, (iii) parent-led in vivo exposure. Sequencing selected specific CBT techniques for depressive disorders Core components of CBT models for child and adolescent depression relate to the negative cognitive styles and behavioral deficits that exist in the relationships and interactions that individuals have with society, family, and friends and with formal organizations. Change in the individual may be undermined by lack of change in his/her external interactions; consequently, a sequencing of skills needs to reflect pre-emptive or concurrent intervention on the external environment. For example, increasing an adolescent’s engagement in enjoyable activities through the specific CBT technique of pleasant events scheduling may not be possible if a parent’s expec.tations of commitment to school work is unrealistic and if that parent encourages the child or the adolescent to engage in school work and discourages socialization or relaxation. Ensuring that these parental beliefs are addressed concurrently will increase the likelihood that the client will be able to implement between-session homework that aims to increase the frequency of pleasant events. The competent therapist needs to carefully examine the relationships between each factor in the case formulation, in order to predict the most appropriate initial order of skill development. This initial sequencing may then be modified if a causal barrier is identified during treatment or if response to a planned technique is undermined by other difficulties. Dosage of techniques In an ideal world dosage would be determined by success in both the learning and the application of each specific skill. The therapist would follow the treatment plan until the client’s goals were achieved and, with a view to ensuring gain maintenance, until the core specific CBT techniques were understood sufficiently to be successfully applied when future challenges arise. In reality, the available number of sessions will likely be determined by an organizational or funding limit or may be based on the chosen manual (which may suggest a fixed or flexible “dose” for each skill). Where the therapist is responsible for determining treatment length, the dosage of individual skills can be estimated by adding the average time required to teach the basics of the skill to the number of sessions estimated as necessary to successfully apply the skill to address current problems, given the severity and complexity of the factors present in the case formulation. For example, in a child who has a single diagnosis of separation anxiety with avoidance that becomes evident only during night-time separation, exposure may be planned over three or four sessions, one for teaching the skill and for developing an initial hierarchy and then two or three sessions (which may be held fortnightly) for reviewing and planning in vivo exposure. For a child who has severe social phobia and moderate generalized anxiety disorder where avoidance is extensive across all social situations and evident through a regular use of safety behaviors such as checking and reassurance seeking, exposure may be planned over six or seven sessions – two for teaching the basic skill and for extending knowledge of exposure to costs and response prevention approaches, and then four or five sessions for reviewing and planning in vivo exposure and for conducting in-session exposure. In CBT  generally, early sessions will tend to be more heavily loaded with “teaching” of new skills. During later sessions more time will be spent on the application of skills, each session generally leaving sufficient time for the practice of multiple skills. Initial treatment plans that reflect the dosage of each skill are estimates; where not restricted by a manual, the competent therapist should review the effectiveness of the intervention and the adequacy of the formulation in relation to progress toward goals. In the Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study protocol (Rogers, Reinecke, and Curry 2005), for example, formal reviews of the formulation and treatment plan occur after six and 12 weeks of treatment. After the first six weeks, during which the client and the therapist have identified specific problematic thoughts, behaviors, and emotions and have introduced core coping strategies, the therapist reviews the case material and constructs a case formulation that decides on whether the next five sessions will be spent on consolidating skills already introduced or on developing further skills (which may be individual or focused on the family). At the 12-week mark, a case review occurs. If the client is identified as a “full responder,” a further six weeks of treatment focuses on rehearsal and consolidation of the skills that have led to improvement. If a partial response has occurred, the clinician reevaluates the case formulation to identify if (i) the initial formulation was inaccurate and consequently inappropriate modules were selected; (ii) an inadequate formulation was designed, leading to omission of needed modules; or (iii) an accurate formulation and treatment plan exists but more time for skill acquisition is required. This cyclic process of formulation, plan, and review at set points encourages the therapist to deliberately evaluate and reflect on his/her practice at the individual client level. The timing of the reviews may be varied according to the severity of the initial and ongoing problems and the degree of engagement with treatment. A maximum of six weeks between deliberate reflections on the case formulation and treatment plan is, however, an appropriate guide for the competent therapist. Communicating and Negotiating with Children, Adolescents, and Parents Initiating treatment through effective communication In the first treatment session it is crucial that the therapist provide appropriate psycho-education about the nature of the disorder(s), the case formulation, and the treatment plan to both the parent and the child or adolescent. To begin this pro.cess, the therapist should present information on how (s)he has conceptualized the problem, using the terminology that best fits with the chosen nomothetic model (that is, choosing between concepts like anxiety, depression, low mood, social phobia, and the like) and the common factors that cause or maintain that problem. The language of this explanation needs to be appropriate for the age of the client and for his/her ability to understand the information provided. For children, such an explanation might amount to a simple listing of two to three reasons why they experience feelings of worry or sadness more often and/or more severely than others. For adolescents and parents, a more sophisticated explanation can be provided. During this explana.tion, the case formulation can be conveyed by way of showing how the client’s experiences relate to the nomothetic model. Using a diagram that illustrates the case formulation can often assist this explanation. The therapist should assist the adolescent or the parent to apply the formulation to his/her own situation by using examples gathered during assessment and by eliciting examples from his/her own experience that fit with the case formulation. During this discussion it is important that fault for current problems is not attributed to a single behavior, cognition or individual. The emphasis should be on understanding how the identified factors have interacted to trigger the problematic anxiety and/or depression. After case formulation, the treatment techniques designed to address each component of the formulated case should be presented. Care must be taken not to overwhelm the clients with information and not to induce excessive fear about the tasks that will be undertaken. The primary goal of presenting the treatment plan is to explain that this plan covers the factors related to the current problem comprehen.sively and, in doing so, to instill a sense of hope that change is possible and that you, as the therapist, are confident that the treatment plan can lead to that change. A brief overview of typical outcomes and a description of the usual course of improvement (for example that change is not linear, that some problems respond quicker than others, that setbacks may occur) can assist in creating realistic expectations of progress and of the likely outcomes. In addition, ensuring that the client’s and the family’s strengths – which have been incorporated into the case formulation and treatment plan – are emphasized during the psycho-education process will assist in building a sense of hope and encourage engagement with the coming sessions. Setting Treatment Goals After the presentation of the case formulation and treatment plan, the focus should move to the negotiation of treatment goals. To ensure that both the child or adolescent and the parents are engaged in the treatment process, both parties should be asked to suggest potential goals. The therapist will need to guide collaboration on the combination and selection of individual goals, and will be best served by encouraging the selection of goals that will allow focus on the child’s or adolescent’s primary diagnosis or on the issues that best reflect the reason(s) for seeking help. The therapist should be wary of setting goals that, although reflecting a real problem, do not address the core presenting problem. For example, in an adolescent who has a principal diagnosis of social phobia and secondary diagnoses of dysthymia and specific phobia (other type – dentists), the treatment may become side-tracked from dealing with the core issues related to the social phobia if a major goal of the treatment is to make the client go to the dentist. The therapist will need to negotiate with the family to select two or three treatment goals. Where there is major disagreement between parent and child or adolescent, allowing each party to select and develop a goal can avoid reaching an impasse from the first session. Such a course would be taken with a view to fostering collaboration and the two parties’ engagement with each other’s goal as sessions progress. It should also be noted that, where parents are to have a role in the treatment, it is appropriate to set a goal related to changes in their parenting. This procedure can also be used to spread the focus away from a child or adolescent who feels unfairly targeted – which is achieved by highlighting that it is not only his/her behavior that will be targeted, but also that of his/her parents. A final goal to consider is the addition of a therapist goal that reflects the CBT approach of “skilling up” vulnerable individuals to make them able to manage independently their experi.ences with anxiety and depression. Adding a therapist goal that states that the client should become “able to independently use [core skills from the treatment plan] to manage [worries/fears/low mood]” reminds families that one of the purposes of the CBT approach is to learn new skills. Reflection on the achievement of this goal can provide evidence that the client may be ready to terminate treatment, since, if the goal is achieved, the likelihood of relapse should be lessoned. Once the general goals have been selected, the therapist should work with the child or adolescent or with the family to refine these goals, so that each one is sufficiently detailed. It is preferable for goals to be stated in a positive way, that is, to express what the client will do rather than what (s)he will not do. In particular, the therapist should focus on ensuring that written goals can be measured and/or that it will be clear when the goal is achieved. “Spend a minimum of one hour, six days a week, socializing with family or friends” may be an appropriate way to quantify success in achieving an initially suggested goal of “Spend less time alone,” for example. The therapist should also collaborate with families to ensure that goals are realistic in terms of what will be achieved in relation to current functioning, that they are achievable within the time frame allowed for the treatment plan, and that, as stated earlier, they are relevant to the primary presenting problem(s). “Attend gymnastics class independently,” where independently is defined as being dropped off and picked up at the front of the building, for a child who currently needs a parent to be in the gym during the lesson, is an example of a goal that appropriately focuses on the presenting problem and is realistic in relation to current functioning and time available for therapy. At times a therapist may find that the child’s or adolescent’s mood and expectations of change are not sufficiently positive to make him/her able to imagine ever reaching the desired goals. The therapist may also find that a child or adolescent is unwilling to commit to any long-term goals, particularly where (s)he is attending therapy unwillingly or does not believe that (s)he has a “problem.” In this situation the therapist may choose to set goals that are relevant to only the next one or two weeks, or to delay setting goals until work on motivation and engagement has been completed. After this, therapy goals can be revisited. Progress, Obstacles, and Termination during Treatment The role of assessment during treatment As has been mentioned several times, case formulations and treatment plans are flexible guides that need to be reviewed and updated on the basis of the client’s progress, as a result of increased understanding of the client’s causal and maintaining factors, and as new information is discovered. This process can be facilitated through the use of formal and informal assessment. The most obvious assessment will be in the form of reflection on goal attainment. Rating each goal on achievement by using percentages, a rating out of 10, or a pictorial sequence of sad to happy faces (depend.ing on the age of the client) helps to maintain session focus on the overall goals and prompts regular reflection on progress and on how close the client is to therapy termination. In addition, therapists should consider the administration of self-report and parent report symptom measures, in order to track change over time. Ideally the full measures, selected from those reviewed in Chapter 7, that were administered before treatment should be administered prior to making a decision to terminate treatment. While these measures are often utilized to track treatment outcome for quality assurance or for research purposes, they also have their place in determining whether a child or adolescent has improved sufficiently to warrant treatment termina.tion. Preferably a therapist would not terminate treatment unless there had been a return to the nonclinical range on these independent measures or, alternatively, if a marked improvement in symptom severity and functioning has occurred. Symptom severity tracking can also be conducted on a more regular basis. As the burden on clients and therapists would be unrealistic for full measures to be used and scored on a regular basis, individualized measures that focus on the most concerning symptoms can be developed for each client. The therapist could either choose to use the most relevant subscale of a full measure or select the top three symptoms from a measure to be completed by the client regularly. The therapist can determine how often this monitoring is conducted. Where the projected treatment length is of fewer than 10 sessions, rating goal attainment and the top three symp.toms could easily be completed at the beginning of every session. Alternatively, if the projected treatment duration will be of three or more months, the therapist might find fortnightly or monthly ratings of progress sufficient. The advantage of such regular monitoring is two-fold. First, results can be quantified and graphed as an illustration of progress to the client and family. Second, the therapist can use the results to flag lack of progress, which may then initiate reflection and review of the case formulation and treatment plan. Managing obstacles during treatment Obstacles in the treatment may have been anticipated within the case formulation (see discussion in the section on deriving a case formulation), may be discovered during treatment, or may arise unexpectedly. The competent therapist needs to respond appropriately to ensure that therapy is not undermined or side-tracked by obstacles. If the obstacle to treatment is a newly identified factor that is causing or maintaining the presenting problem or represents a lack of response to a planned treatment technique, the therapist should review the case formulation and modify the treatment plan so as to incorporate new techniques or to adjust the presentation, order, or length of focus on the existing techniques. This “review and modify” approach would also be appropriate when the obstacle relates to lack of motivation, lack of belief in treatment utility, or lack of effective collaboration between parents and child or adolescent or between client and therapist. Another form of obstacle is the occurrence of a “crisis” – that is, an event that is all-encompassing for the individual or the family and prevents work on therapy-related tasks; or an event that is more important than the initial treatment goals. These crises may be a consequence of the child’s or adolescent’s presenting problem, or they may be unexpected and unrelated to it. In either case, they can be harnessed as teaching material on which planned specific CBT techniques can be practiced. The competent therapist will allow the client to briefly vent and will acknowledge the distress experienced, then will guide the client to apply a treatment technique to the situation. For example, an adolescent who is overwhelmed by an assignment’s deadline (which (s)he has avoided working on for several weeks) might be guided either (i) through a cognitive restructuring exercise designed to make him/her address negative thoughts related to his/her likely achievement on the task; or (ii) through a problem-solving exercise designed to enable him/her to initiate productive work on completing the assignment. For a situation not directly caused by the child’s symptoms, such as having a substitute teacher for the next week, the therapist can either use a previously introduced technique to illustrate how to cope with challenging situations, or (s)he can use the incident itself to illustrate how a new technique may be applied. A final note: occasionally an event may occur in a family that fundamentally shifts the priorities for change, and sometimes even the resources that the family has to dedicate to the therapy. Events such as diagnosis of a family member with a terminal illness, defense force deployment, natural disasters, or parental separation inevitably interfere with the direction or timing of therapy. The therapist will need to evaluate with the family how to deal with the crisis without neglecting the existence of preex.isting problems. An appropriate plan may be to take a hiatus from the treatment plan and either have a treatment break or use treatment sessions to provide support related to the crisis for a set period of time. In both cases provision should be made for a time when planned treatment sessions will be reinitiated, or at least for a “check-in” call from the therapist to evaluate the need for further intervention in case a “hiatus” is taken. In such circumstances the therapist will need to review the case formulation and treatment plan to ensure its adequacy, given the new situation. Ending Therapy and Fostering Maintenance of Gains The final skill that a competent therapist must demonstrate during the provision of CBT is the ability to plan for the end of the therapy and to proactively foster the long-term maintenance of treatment gains. Treatment termination should be prepared for, irrespective of whether this termination is determined by the end of a manualized program or the end of funded sessions or is based on the achievement of goals. One or two sessions prior to the anticipated end of therapy, the child or adolescent, the parent, and the therapist should review goal achievement. Depending on progress, this review may be used (i) to encourage a final, concerted effort to achieve goals through increased practice; (ii) to encourage discussion of how the achievement of the therapist’s “skilling up” goal will allow the family to continue to make progress toward the remaining goals; or, (iii) in situations where progress toward goals has been poor, to suggest that therapy should be extended rather than terminated (with an accompanying review of the case formulation and treatment plan). If therapy is to be terminated, then the therapist should elicit any  concerns that the child or adolescent or the parent has about ending the treatment and should address any unrealistic beliefs or expectations regarding the client’s ability to cope independently. When moving toward termination of treatment, the therapist may also want to consider the utility of spacing sessions fortnightly or monthly, to allow the client to experience growing independence while still accessing support. The majority of manuals have specific content that addresses expectations regarding the potential for relapse and proactivity in maintaining gains. If the therapist works according to CBT principles, (s)he should make sure that the client and family are provided with psycho-education on the risk of relapse and the methods of responding to relapse. Most importantly, given that one of the goals of CBT is to have “skilled up” a client to manage the symptoms independently despite a higher underlying vulnerability, the therapist should illustrate to the client how to maintain gains through the continued application of the newly learnt skills. A personalized plan should be developed for how the client will continue to be proactive in dealing with his/her anxiety and/or depression and what his/her individual “tool kit” includes for managing these emotions; the plan should list the emotions, cognitions, and behav.iors that may signal the client’s need to utilize his/her CBT skills. Within this plan there should be a section on help seeking that includes supports from family and community, and also how to seek further professional help. Therapists should dedicate session time to setting short and long-term goals for the client. These may relate to continued work toward the initial therapy goals or, for clients who have achieved all the set goals, toward the recognition of those situations that may be challenging in the future (such as first school camp, applying for a job, or moving to high school), where CBT skills may be used to prepare for the event and, by doing so, may decrease the likelihood of a relapse. Conclusion Case formulation and treatment planning are fundamental skills for competent  practice. They are, however, highly challenging skills to learn. All therapists, but  particularly those in the early stages of their career, should take advantage of supervision – either from senior therapists in the case of trainees or through peer supervision for independent practitioners. Discussion of assessment results, your case formulation, and the resultant treatment plan will assist you to identify “gaps” in your logic and will ensure that you can express that logic to the client and his/her family in a confident manner. Havighurst and Downey (2009: 256) warn that, without a “combination of humility, confidence and clarity” in designing case formulations, the clinician risks de-emphasizing his/her professional knowledge, may derive tentative and somewhat meaningless formulations, or may come to make judgments that are not carefully considered or based on the col.lected data. Case formulation is part science, part art, and it is consequently important to remember that, at times, you will create a formulation that does not work. However, if you adapt flexibly to contradictory or new information, you are still working in the best interests of your client. References Addis, Michael E., and Neil S. Jacobson. 2000. “A Closer Look at the Treatment Rationale and Homework Compliance in Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy for Depression.” Cognitive Therapy and Research, 24: 313–26. DOI: 10.1023/A:1005563304265 APA, Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. 2006. “Evidence-Based Practice in Psychology.” American Psychologist, 61: 271–85. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.61.4.271 Boschen, Mark J., and Tian P. S. Oei. 2008. “A Cognitive Behavioral Case Formulation Frame.work for Treatment Planning in Anxiety Disorders.” Depression and Anxiety, 25: 811–23. DOI: 10.1002/da.20301 Chadwick, Paul, Clare Williams, and Joanna Mackenzie. 2003. “Impact of Case Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Psychosis.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41: 671–80. Chorpita, Bruce F. 2007. Modular Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy for Childhood Anxiety Disorders. New York: Guilford Press. Eells, Tracy D., Kenneth G. Lombart, Nicholas Salsman, Edward M. Kendjelic, Carolyn T. Schneiderman, and Cynthia P. Lucas. 2011. “Expert Reasoning in Psychotherapy Case For.mulation.” Psychotherapy Research, 21: 385–99. DOI: 10.1080/10503307.2010.539284 Eisen, Andrew R., and Wendy K. Silverman. 1993. “Should I Relax or Change My Thoughts? A Preliminary Examination of Cognitive Therapy, Relaxation Training, and Their Combination with Overanxious Children.” Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 7: 265–79. Eisen, Andrew R., and Wendy K. Silverman. 1998. “Prescriptive Treatment for Generalized Anxiety Disorder in Children.” Behavior Therapy, 29: 105–21. DOI: 10.1016/S0005.7894(98)80034-8 Havighurst, Sophie S., and Laurel Downey. 2009. “Clinical Reasoning for Child and Adolescent Mental Health Practitioners: The Mindful Formulation.” Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 14: 251–71. DOI: 10.1177/1359104508100888 Hudson, Jennifer L., and Ronald M. Rapee. 2004. “From Anxious Temperament to Disor.der: An Etiological Model of Generalized Anxiety Disorder. In Richard G. Heimberg, Cynthia L. Turk, and Douglas S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Advances in Research and Practice (pp. 51–76). New York: Guilford Publications. Kuyken, Willem, Claire D. Fothergill, Meyrem Musa, and Paul Chadwick. 2005. “The Reli.ability and Quality of Cognitive Case Formulation.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43: 1187–201. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2004.08.007 Macneil, Craig A., Melissa K. Hasty, Philippe Conus, and Michael Berk. 2012. “Is Diagnosis Enough to Guide Interventions in Mental Health? Using Case Formulation in Clinical Practice.” BMC Medicine, 10: 111. DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-111 Persons, Jacqueline B. 1989. Cognitive Therapy in Practice: A Case Formulation Approach New York: W. W. Norton. Persons, Jacqueline B, and Michael A. Tompkins. 1997. “Cognitive–Behavioral Case Formula.tion.” In Tracy D. Eells (Ed.), Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation (pp. 314–39). New York: Guildford Press. Persons, Jacqueline B., Nicole A. Roberts, Christine A. Zalecki, and Whitney A. G. Brechwald. 2006. “Naturalistic Outcome of Case Formulation-Driven Cognitive-Behavior Therapy for Anxious Depressed Outpatients.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44: 1041–51. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2005.08.005 DOI:10.1016/j.brat.2005.08.005 Rapee, Ronald M. 2001. “The Development of Generalised Anxiety.” In Michael W. Vasey and Mark R. Dadds (Eds.), The Developmental Psychopathology of Anxiety (pp. 481–504). New York: Oxford University Press. Rogers, Gregory M., Mark A. Reinecke, and John F. Curry. 2005. “Case Formulation in TADS CBT.” Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12: 198–208. DOI: 10.1016/S1077.7229(05)80025-2 Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Team. 2009. “The Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS): Outcomes over 1 Year of Naturalistic Follow-Up.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 166: 1141–9. DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.08111620 