17 Problem-Solving Skills Training Ana M. Ugueto, Lauren C. Santucci,  Lauren S. Krumholz, and John R. Weisz Introduction Originally described by D’Zurilla and Goldfried (1971), problem solving is one of the most common and versatile treatment approaches used to help children overcome anx.iety and depressive disorders (Chorpita and Daleiden 2009). Children with depression and anxiety often have difficulty solving problems and usually give up easily, or they apply one overlearned behavioral strategy to resolve a problem. When the problem persists, they may feel that problems are impossible to solve – or, more specifically, impossible for them to solve. Depressed children who have a negative or depressogenic cognitive style (Gladstone and Kaslow 1995; Jacobs, Reinecke, Gollan, and Kane 2008) may not recognize that having problems is part of life and is “normal.” Instead they may see everyday or common problems as something that is happening to them alone, and they may think: “Why does bad stuff only happen to me?” Similarly, anxious youth with a cognitive bias toward threat interpretation (see Vasey and MacLeod 2001 for a review) may see the world as a dangerous place, where they must avoid any pos.sible perilous situation to stay safe. Finally, children with traumatic stress may have learned maladaptive behaviors as a way to cope with uncontrollable traumatic experi.ences and, subsequently, use these same behaviors to manage difficult social situations and emotional dysregulation (Cohen, Mannarino, and Deblenger 2006). Teaching youths that problems are universal and should be expected is fundamental in training children and adolescents to use problem solving. Problem solving helps youth inhibit the tendency to react impulsively (e.g., by running away) or act passively (e.g., by waiting for the situation to resolve itself, or for someone else to fix it). Learning how to solve problems, through the generation and evaluation of solutions, helps counteract rigid thinking associated with anxiety and depressive disorders and teaches children how to use a specific strategy to increase cognitive flexibility and Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. to gain a broader perspective on events. Problem solving can be used to help youth solve a variety of problems, whether academic (e.g., poor grades), social (e.g., bullying), familial (e.g., negotiating with parents) or related to activating events (e.g., divorce of parents), treatment goals (e.g., making friends), and moods (e.g., feeling bored). When youth are able to recognize a problematic situation, apply the sequential problem-solving method, and successfully solve a problem, they may feel empowered and be more likely to use the skill to solve future problems. Problem solving helps children break abstract and overwhelming problems into concrete and solvable parts. The following sections of this chapter were based on a selection of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) treatment manuals for anxiety (Kendall and Hedke 2006; Rapee et al. 2006), trauma (Cohen et al. 2006), and depression (Brent and Poling 1997; Clarke, Lewinsohn, and Hops 1990; Curry et al. 2005), as well as on the clinical experiences of the authors (e.g., Chorpita and Weisz 2009). For the purposes of this chapter, children and adolescents are collectively referred to as “children” or “youth.” Key Features of Problem-Solving Competencies When you teach children problem solving, it is important to teach them that problems are part of life, that everyone has them, and that one can learn how to cope or solve problems effectively. Problems can be small (e.g., forgetting homework) or large (e.g., fight with a boy-/girlfriend), and may be fixed quickly (e.g., by apologizing to a friend) or may take time to solve (e.g., studying daily for an upcoming test). Regardless of type or size, any problem that is within the control of the youth can be solved by using a sequential approach. The CBT approach to problem solving typically involves five steps: 1. identifying and defining the problem; 2. generating a list of possible solutions; 3. evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each possible solution; 4. choosing a solution; 5. using the solution and determining whether the problem was solved or whether another solution is needed to solve it. In step 1 – identifying and defining the problem – it is critical that children choose a problem that is within their ability to solve; trying to solve a problem that it outside of one’s control will only lead to feelings of frustration, helplessness, and hopeless.ness. Therapists should help them determine whether they can change the situation or need instead to change their reaction when the situation cannot be changed (Rapee et al. 2006). For example, youth may not be able to change the divorce of their parents, but they may be able to change their emotional reaction to the divorce. Therapists should educate children that changing one’s reaction to a situation is something that is within one’s control, even if the situation itself cannot be altered. Once an appropriate problem has been selected, the problem should be defined in specific and concrete terms. Problems that are too vague (e.g., “I hate school”) or too ambiguous (e.g., “School is boring”) will be difficult to solve because they do not define the exact problem or identify the goals of problem solving. Additionally, it will be difficult to generate alternative solutions if the problem is not defined clearly. If a youth defines a problem too broadly, the therapist should ask questions in order to better understand and to help the child refine the problem. Take the example of “I hate school.” Using Socratic questioning, the therapist can guide the child to reframe the problem thus: “I failed my science test and need to get a passing grade on the next test.” In step 2 – generating a list of solutions – the therapist should help the youth think of as many alternatives as possible. During this phase, encourage the child to think cre.atively. Quantity, not quality of solutions is the goal, as brainstorming is a way to stim.ulate cognitive flexibility (Curry et al. 2005). If the child is having difficulty brainstorming ideas, the therapist may offer some suggestions to stimulate the child’s thoughts; the greater the number of ideas, the greater the likelihood of finding an effective solution. In order to increase the number of alternatives, combinations of ideas also are encour.aged. For example, a youth may list “Ask questions in class” and separately list “Go to afterschool tutoring.” These solutions can be combined into an additional one, “Ask questions in class and go to after-school tutoring,” which would be a third solution. Remember, too, that ideas should not be criticized or ruled out from the start; any solution the child describes should be listed, even if it seems implausible (e.g., “Study every day after school for five hours”), ridiculous (e.g., “Break into school and steal the test”), or antisocial (e.g., “Cheat off another student”). The inclusion of unrealistic or ridiculous solutions makes the task more fun and more engaging for the child, and encourages the child to think more creatively, “outside the box,” about possible solu.tions. In fact, if the child does not generate such a solution, the therapist should volun.teer one, to demonstrate that any solution that comes to mind should be listed, regardless of how outrageous it might be. In our experience, children are usually thinking of such solutions even if they do not say them aloud to the therapist; so, if the therapist articulates an outlandish solution, the child may then do the same. Evaluation of the merits of each possible solution should be withheld until the next step. In step 3 – evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each possible solution – each solution is scrutinized as to its unique advantages and disadvantages for solving the problem. Children should think about, and predict, the utility of each solution and then list as many “strengths and weaknesses,” “pros and cons,” “positive and negative consequences,” or “good and bad reasons” as they can. If youth are having difficulty generating the advantages and disadvantages of a given solution, therapists can query the youth, or even suggest possible benefits and limitations, to ensure that the evalua.tion is a fair appraisal of the solution. Moreover, therapists should encourage children to think of both short- and long-term consequences of the solution. This is particularly important for solutions that are implausible, ridiculous, or antisocial. For example, a child who lists “Cheat off another student” would also have to list the advantages (e.g., “Wouldn’t have to study,” “Would probably get a better grade”) and the disadvantages (e.g., “Would get expelled if I were caught,” “The other student may not know more than I do,” “Would never learn the material which I may need some day”). If the eval.uation does not accurately reflect the strengths and weaknesses of a solution, youth will be at a disadvantage when they have to select one solution to try to solve the problem. In step 4 – choosing a solution – children must choose the solution they think will best solve the problem. Ideally, they would choose the solution with the most advantages and fewest disadvantages, and thus the one most likely to actually solve the problem. To help the child choose the most effective solution, the therapist and the child can list the solutions in the order of their likely success, from highest to lowest. This tech.nique helps the child pick the most preferred solution, while it also guides the child’s next steps should the first solution prove ineffective. However, some children may feel strongly about a solution that the therapist does not favor. In these instances, youth should be allowed to choose the solution they want to use without any criticism from the therapist. For example, a child may choose “Study with a friend,” while the therapist thinks “Ask questions in class and go to after-school tutoring” would be a more successful solution. In this case, the therapist should defer to the child, who may then learn something useful after implementing the solution. Also, to facilitate use of the solution, the chosen solution may need to be broken down into smaller steps (Rapee et al. 2006). For example, “Study with a friend” might involve asking a friend to study together, setting up a study schedule, bringing books and other materials to the study session, and studying for two hours. It is important for the therapist to explain to the child that there is no one “correct” or “perfect” solution; most problems may be addressed adequately in a number of different ways, and choosing a solution that is “good enough” is better than doing nothing and simply waiting for the problem to subside, or for someone else to solve it (Curry et al. 2000). In step 5 – using the solution and determining whether the problem was solved or whether another solution is needed to solve it – children are encouraged to implement the solution and determine its effectiveness for solving the problem. Without this step, youth may continue implementing an ineffective solution without thinking about why it failed and without choosing another one, which may work better. Usually children are not able to implement the solution during a therapy session, so the therapist should assign step 5 as homework and review it with the child at the next session. If the child implements the solution and this does not produce the desired effects, the child should repeat step 4 and choose the next best solution. If the child had ranked the possible solutions in step 4 (as described above), (s)he can then try the second solution on the list; and, if that does not work, the third, the fourth, and so on – until a solution successfully solves the problem. When the first solution does not solve the problem as expected, youth with anxiety and depression may feel helpless and ineffective. It is important to reiterate to them that problem solving is a learning process and that it is impossible to predict all the consequences of a solution before it is implemented. Competence in Treating Anxiety Disorders and Depression Anxiety Problem solving is a particularly important skill in the context of anxiety treatment, as anxious youth tend to rely on unhelpful strategies, such as escape or avoidance, to manage fear (American Psychiatric Association 2000; Dadds and Barrett 2001). Problem solving can be a helpful tool when a child is confronted with an anxiety-provoking situation, as happens during in vivo exposures (Kendall et al. 2005). In such a situation, anxious youth may overestimate the likelihood that something scary or dangerous will happen and may underestimate their ability to cope in case “something” occurs, which may ultimately lead them to avoid (or try to avoid) the situation (Dadds and Barrett 2001). Going through sequential problem solving may help the child plan in advance how to handle an anxiety-provoking situation (e.g., by thinking positive thoughts and then by “riding the wave of anxiety”), how to choose a less challenging exposure when what was planned feels too difficult for the time being (e.g., by saying hello to one stranger instead of saying hello to two strangers), or how to know what steps to take if his/her mind goes blank in the face of anxiety (e.g., take a deep breath). In the case of traumatic stress, children may have a limited repertoire of responses when dealing with interpersonal situations and may cope with anger or withdrawal. Thus, problem solving may help youth manage strong emotions in a more prosocial manner (Cohen et al. 2006). When teaching sequential problem solving to anxious youth, therapists should con.sider that children may be reluctant to solve their own problems when these are related to fears. Additionally, youth with anxiety may have difficulty defining clearly what problem to solve. For example, a child might say “I hate swimming class,” which may lead to solutions such as “bring a friend” or “try out another sport,” when in fact the child dislikes swimming class because he misses his mother and worries that something bad will happen to her when she is not with him. So it is important that the therapist use Socratic questioning to identify the real problem (e.g., “I’m afraid something bad will happen to my mom when I am at swimming class”). Furthermore, if the therapist sets a goal with the child by discussing what the latter hopes to achieve through problem solving and by making this achievement into a goal, the therapist should also ensure that the goal is realistic for the child. For example, if a socially anxious child tends to blush when speaking to others, the goal “Don’t turn red” may not be realistic. A better goal may be instead this: “Keep talking to a friend even when I start turning red.” When generating solutions, it is important to allow “bad ideas,” or the unhelpful solutions that the child currently engages in, to make it onto the list (e.g., “Stay home from school the day I have to give a book report”). However, given that youth with anxiety tend to rely on escape or avoidance to manage negative emotions, the thera.pist should encourage the child to generate other possible solutions as well. Similarly, if the list includes solutions that involve avoiding a feared situation, use the evaluation step to consider the weaknesses of such solutions. While a “pro” of avoidance may be “I wouldn’t feel anxious if I stayed home from school,” the “cons” may include long-term consequences such as “I would never learn that I can handle it,” or “I won’t get over my fears.” If a child chooses an avoidant solution to practice, the ther.apist should refrain from criticizing the choice and, instead, allow the child to imple.ment the solution and then evaluate the results. During the evaluation stage, the child may uncover for himself or herself why this avoidant choice is not the best option (see section “Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them”). Sequential problem solving helps to break down overwhelming situations into prob.lems that can be solved. When large problems are broken down, anxious youth have an opportunity to increase their sense of self-efficacy and to gather evidence that con.tradicts their anxious thoughts and feared outcomes. Depression Problem solving is an integral component of depression treatment (Chorpita and Daleiden 2009); it is the key strategy for depressed youth to employ in the face of situations that cause distress. Symptoms associated with depression, such as low energy or fatigue, a sense of helplessness and hopelessness, and suicidal ideation can interfere with a child’s or adolescent’s ability to effectively solve problems (Stark, Streusand, Arora, and Patel 2012). These symptoms often lead to maladaptive behavioral ten.dencies related to problem solving: avoidance of activities due to the energy and effort that must be exerted to engage in problem solving; tendency to attempt only one – overlearned – behavioral strategy; difficulty generating beneficial solutions; tendency to give up quickly if the desired outcome is not achieved; impulsive suicide attempt when no other solution can be fathomed (Abela and Hankin 2008). These tendencies express and support the depressed youth’s belief that (s)he is unable to successfully manage life stressors. Therapists can help depressed children break this vicious cycle by teaching them problem solving, while remaining aware of the common difficulties that interfere with a depressed youth’s ability to effectively apply this approach. Therefore therapists must carefully consider factors that could affect depressed children’s acquisi.tion and application of the problem solving approach. These factors encompass nega.tive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that characterize depressive disorders, which should be addressed by therapists before, during, and after teaching this skill. Prior to initiating problem-solving steps, therapists may need to address interfering feelings (e.g., depressed or irritable mood) and behaviors (e.g., social withdrawal and lethargic behavior) through mood boosting activities; or they may need to address interfering thoughts about the problem – or about one’s ability to solve the problem (e.g., “I can’t do anything right”) – through cognitive restructuring. When helping depressed youth identify and define a problem, therapists should be aware of possible cognitive distortions related to all-or-nothing thinking (e.g., “If I don’t get 100 percent on the test, I’m a failure”) and exaggeration (e.g., “Nothing ever works out for me”), which may become apparent and may interfere with this step. In addition, depressed youth may benefit from breaking a problem into smaller parts in order to feel more hopeful about being able to solve it. Examples of problems that may occur for depressed youth are low mood, interpersonal conflict, academic failure, social isolation, suicidal ideation, and thinking that one is not good (smart, funny, attractive, or athletic) enough. When generating a list of possible solutions, therapists may initially need to provide increased support to depressed children in order to help them brainstorm a variety of solutions. It is especially important that solutions not be evaluated at this point, in part because of the tendency of depressed youth to criticize their own ideas. When evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each solu.tion, therapists should ensure that there is careful consideration of its advantages and disadvantages, since depressed youth are more likely to focus on the potential disadvantages of each solution. In contrast, for children who list suicide as a possible solution and only see the advantages of self-harm, the disadvantages need to be consid.ered and discussed thoroughly. To increase the sense of mastery and agency, therapists should encourage youth with depression to select the solution of their choice to imple.ment, except in cases where the solution involves self-harm (e.g., suicide or non-suicidal self-injury). Children should also be reminded that sometimes multiple solutions must be tried before the outcome they desire is achieved. Therefore it can be beneficial for youth to create a backup plan involving several additional solutions in case the initial one did not work. After therapists have taught problem solving, they should encourage children continuously to use this approach through therapeutic homework assignments and opportune moments in session. Successfully solving a problem can increase a youth’s sense of competence about being able to manage problems that arise as a normal part of the developmental process. In addition, effectively solving a specific problem can lead to enhanced mood, at least temporarily. Most importantly, each problem that depressed children effectively solve provides evidence contradicting the belief that they are hopeless or helpless. And for youth at risk of suicide, problem solving helps them re-evaluate the consequences of an impulsive and life-threatening act, think of alternatives that may be more effective, and try something other than self-harm (Brent and Poling 1997). Thus problem solving should be incorporated into the treatment of depres.sion for youth because it is a key ingredient in alleviating depressive symptoms and building a more positive sense of self. Competence in Treating both Children and Adolescents Children Problem solving can be a useful tool when planning for the life events that children may encounter – such as starting school, attending camp for the first time, getting in a fight with a friend, moving to a new town, or the birth of a sibling. Already a relatively concrete skill, sequential problem solving can be made even more developmentally appropriate for children by using child-friendly language to describe the process, presenting the skill in an engaging manner, providing scaffolding such as visual cues and writing down the five steps, and encouraging caregiver involvement. Language such as “what’s the problem,” “think of solutions,” “pick one,” and “try it” may be helpful for children. Additionally, visual cues with smiling and frowning faces can be used as headings to signify the strengths and weaknesses of each solution. Acronyms like “RIBEYE” (Relax, Identify the problem, Brainstorm solutions, Evaluate solutions, say Yes to one solution, and Encourage child to try solution: see Curry et al. 2005: 79) and “STEPS” (Say what the problem is, Think of solutions, Examine each one, Pick one and try it out, and See if it worked: see Weisz, Thurber, Sweeney, Proffitt, and LeGagnoux 1997), or a mnemonic like “The Five Ps of Problem Solving: Problem, Purpose, Plans, Predict and pick, and Pat yourself on the back”: see Stark et al. 2007, pp. 33–5) can make it easier for youth to remember and implement all of the problem-solving steps. Therapists can also suggest possible solu.tions for young children, who may have difficulty generating ideas independently. To introduce the skill, choose a silly or fun problem to solve. For example, tell the child he or she has to move a piece of paper from one side of the room to the other without getting out of his or her chair. Potential solutions might be making the paper into a ball and throwing it across the room, or creating a paper airplane and sailing it to the other side. Then, after evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each solution, the child gets to pick one and try it out in session. Alternatively, the ther.apist can present the child with a cartoon image of a dog who appears sad, on one side of a fence, and a bone wrapped in a bow, on the other side of the fence. Using this image as an example, the therapist can walk through the problem-solving steps to help the dog get its bone. Once familiar with the problem-solving process, children can discuss problems in their own life. Instructing the caregiver in the use of sequential problem solving may facilitate the use of this skill outside of therapy. If possible, the child should teach the caregiver the steps to problem solving and should show the caregiver how to apply these steps to a particular problem – perhaps the silly problem presented to the child initially. Once the caregiver knows the sequential problem-solving steps, (s)he can support the child in the use of this skill by gently reminding the child when and how the skill can be used, and, if needed, by helping the child apply these steps to problems as they arise. In addition, the caregiver can be encouraged to give praise for the application of this skill, in order to promote its use. Caregiver involvement can be particularly helpful for younger children who may have difficulty completing homework, identifying appro.priate problems, or remembering the sequence of steps. Behavioral rehearsal, both in and out of session, will help promote generalization of this tool to the child’s life. Adolescents In order to competently teach adolescents to use problem solving, therapists should make adaptations that are developmentally (e.g., cognitively, emotionally, and socially) appropriate. Although the core components of problem solving are the same across developmental levels, therapists will need to make adjustments in the way problem solving is taught. Adolescents with lower cognitive functioning may benefit from the use of concrete strategies for problem solving, initially with more frequent support from therapists and caregivers. Adolescents with limited social maturity may need more assistance in generating prosocial solutions and in evaluating how others would respond to their solutions; some help in the area of perspective-taking skills may be welcome. The types of problems that adolescents face will likely differ in content from the types of problems experienced by children. For example, adolescents may struggle with developing and navigating romantic relationships, desiring more independence from their caregivers, questioning their sexual orientation, and experimenting with drugs and alcohol. While these are common developmental challenges, they can gen.erate problems for the adolescent that can be addressed through problem solving. Before helping adolescents apply problem solving to distressing situations in their own lives, therapists should provide adolescents with engaging examples of problems to be solved that are common for youth of the same age (e.g., an adolescent girl who feels self-conscious because other classmates are spreading a rumor that she is promis.cuous; or an adolescent boy who is insulted by older boys in the locker room for being small). Encouraging the active participation of adolescents in applying problem solv.ing is beneficial: such participation helps them establish increased autonomy, empowers them, and equips them to solve problems independently. While some care.givers may be helpful and supportive of the adolescent where this skill is concerned, therapists should carefully consider to what extent caregivers should be involved; and this should be done on the basis of the developmental level of the teen as well as on the dynamic of the adolescent–caregiver relationship (e.g., the therapist should ask him/herself: “Would the caregiver’s presence facilitate or antagonize the adolescent?” If the latter, that would result in further conflict with caregivers). Example 17.1 Adolescent with depression David is a 15-year-old boy diagnosed with major depressive disorder. He arrives at the session upset about not making the basketball team at his school. 1. Identifying and defining the problem: I am feeling sad because I did not make the team. 2. Generating a list of possible solutions: A. Play video games. B. Do nothing and wait for sadness to go away. C. Change my thinking. D. Sign up for another afterschool activity. E. Transfer to a different school and try out for the basketball team there. 3. Evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each possible solution: Solution A: Play video games.  Pros: Video games are fun. I will get better at playing them.  Cons: It’s not possible to play video games all day. I will probably still feel sad when I’m not playing them. Solution B: Do nothing and wait for sadness to go away.  Pros: This will be easy. I don’t have to do anything.  Cons: It may take a long time to stop feeling sad. I might get bored doing nothing. Solution C: Change my thinking.  Pros: This is quick. I know how to do it. It can help me feel better.  Cons: It can be hard to figure out more positive thoughts. Solution D: Sign up for another afterschool activity.  Pros: I’ll still get to do something I like after school. I could meet new people.  Cons: It might not be as fun as basketball. If I have to try out again, I may not make it. Solution E: Transfer to a different school and try out for the basketball team there.  Pros: I get to play on a basketball team.  Cons: I’ll have to make all new friends. I might not make the team at that school. I might not like my new teachers. 4. Choosing a solution: I’ll combine solutions C and D. I’ll change my negative thoughts to more positive thoughts, and I’ll join the track team because anyone can join, and I already have a few friends on the team. 5. Using the solution and determining whether the problem was solved, or whether another solution is needed to solve the problem: The solution worked! I changed my thought from “I’m not good at basketball” to “I am good at basketball. I just didn’t play my best during tryouts.” Also, I joined the track team. I am enjoying being on the team, and my new thoughts are helping me feel better about myself. Common Obstacles to Competent Practice and Methods to Overcome Them Therapists often face difficulties teaching children to successfully use sequential problem solving on their own. Sometimes youth will be so upset by a problem that they cannot calm down enough to learn or apply the problem-solving method; in these situations, therapists should allow children to express their frustrations and feelings, to use another coping skill (e.g., relaxation), and then to begin the problem-solving approach once they are less emotional and more rational (Curry et al. 2005). In order to facilitate the child’s use of problem solving, the therapist can first teach the child the sequential steps with the help of a fun problem (e.g., keep a balloon in the air without using your hands). This allows the youth to focus on learning the steps instead of focusing on the problem. Then the therapist can select a common problem typical for children, like forgetting a home.work assignment, to show how the steps can be used in a different way. Finally, the ther.apist should encourage the child to select a real-life problem. If the youth says that he or she does not have any problems, the therapist can tell the child that problems can be small, everyday problems and remind the child of a problem previously mentioned in session. Once the therapist has taught the child problem solving, (s)he should look for opportunities to reinforce this skill in session. Common examples include using problem solving if a child is not doing the therapy homework or is losing it, does not want to par.ticipate in a particular therapeutic exercise, or no longer wants to attend therapy. Additionally, therapists should use problem solving whenever a crisis arises. For example, if a youth comes into session upset about a fight with a friend, a grade on an assignment, or an upcoming tryout for a team or play, the therapist can suggest using problem solv.ing. Likewise, if a caregiver complains that the child was suspended from school for aggressive behavior, the therapist can use problem solving with that child, to make him/her think of alternative behaviors that would not lead to punishments. Finally, it is important that the therapist’s approach be Socratic: the act of querying should help the child identify the problem more specifically and the questions themselves should make him/her think of possible solutions, or of advantages and disadvantages of pos.sible solutions; the therapist should not tell the child what solutions to list, what the pros and cons of each solution are, or what solution to choose, and(s)he certainly should not guarantee that any solution will be 100 percent effective. Therapists should also anticipate specific problems that may arise in relation to each of the five steps. The most common obstacles for step 1 are that the problem is not solvable by the youth and/or is too large in scope. Take the example of the daughter of a deployed military solider who tells the therapist: “My dad is fighting in Iraq and I want him to come home.” This is certainly a problem that the child cannot solve. In this situation, the therapist should explain to the child that some situations are such that we cannot change or solve them no matter how much we would like to, and that in these special situations we can only change what is in our control. The therapist can then ask the child how she feels about her father being deployed and identify these feelings (e.g., sad mood, missing father) as a problem that can be solved. In step 2 typical therapist mistakes include not letting a youth list antisocial, implausible, or ridiculous alternatives out of fear that the child would choose one of these ineffective solutions. Allowing children to list antisocial solutions proves to the child that any solution may be listed for consideration. Remember that all possible solutions will be evaluated in step 3; but solutions that are not on the list cannot be evaluated. For example, if a therapist is working with a child who often hits his younger brother when he is annoyed, and the child does not list that behavior, the therapist would be wise to suggest it. This way the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, including the child’s typical antisocial one, can be considered and evaluated, and this will make it less likely that the child actually will select an antisocial solution. Another common mistake is that therapists do not sug.gest possible solutions when youth are having difficulty brainstorming alternatives. When children can only generate one or two solutions, the therapist should suggest alternatives or use a Socratic approach to help them generate more ideas. Furthermore, therapists should suggest some outlandish ideas themselves, to illustrate that the goal is to think of as many solutions as possible, regardless of how effective they may be. This approach usu.ally gets youth laughing and stimulates more solutions. A frequent obstacle in step 3 is that the child does not list all possible strengths and weaknesses of the solutions and does not evaluate the unique advantages and disad.vantages of each. If children keep listing the same or generic pros (“It would help me solve the problem”) and cons (“I wouldn’t get into trouble”) for each solution, therapists should encourage them to think about positive and negative aspects of a particular solution that the other solutions do not have. The more the youth can see the differences between the solutions, the easier it should be for them to choose one. In step 4 therapists often have difficulty when a child wants to choose a solution that the therapist does not believe will be most effective, especially one that may even reinforce avoidant or antisocial behavior. If this happens, therapists can review the strengths and weaknesses, emphasizing the negative aspects of the chosen solution and the positive aspects of other, more desirable ones. However, if the child still prefers the less effective solution, the therapist should allow the child to implement it, unless it involves self-harm. If the chosen solution does not solve the problem, the therapist should discuss the failure of the solution with the child at the next session. This discussion can lead to the re-evalu.ation of the chosen solution, the reconsideration of the other solutions, the generation of more solutions, and the selection of a new solution that may be more likely to solve the given problem. Additionally, if the therapist is concerned about the child implementing a less effective solution and then having to wait several days to discuss the outcome with the therapist, the therapist can have the child choose in advance a second solution, which the child can implement if the first does not solve the problem. An additional obstacle often encountered in step 4 is that therapists fail to help youth break the solution into smaller steps before implementing it, which may result in difficulty initiating the solution. Therapists should review step 5 in the next session, to discuss how well the solution worked. Failure to do so will make it less likely that youth will use problem solving in the future. During the review, the therapist can praise the child, highlight how this skill helped, or, when the solution did not solve the problem, discuss the limitations of the solution and remind the child to try another one if the first was unsuccessful. When the first solution is not successful, the therapist should encourage the youth to try another one immediately instead of waiting for several days to speak with the therapist. When discussing the problem initially, the therapist and the child can identify a solution, and then identify one or more backup solutions in case the first solution does not work (for details about ranking solutions, see steps 4 and 5 in the section “Key Features of Problem-Solving Competencies”). An unsuccessful solution should not be viewed as a failure but, instead, as an opportunity to try another solution. Problem solving is a highly versatile skill and one of the most common ones used in CBT to treat children with anxiety and depression. In a review of evidence-based treat.ments, problem solving came up as the fifth and the ninth most common coping skill taught to youth with depression and anxiety, respectively (Chorpita and Daleiden 2009). Children with internalizing disorders have difficulty solving problems and often act impulsively or passively when faced with distress. Youth can learn the five sequential steps – identifying a problem, generating a list of possible solutions, evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each one, choosing a solution to implement, and finally implementing it and determining whether the problem was solved or whether another solution is needed – as a part of learning how to effectively solve problems that impact their functioning. Learning problem solving increases children’s cognitive flexibility and behavioral repertoire, counteracts perceptions of helplessness and hopelessness, and enhances self-efficacy. Children and adolescents with depression and anxiety disor.ders can learn alternatives to avoidance, passivity, and other maladaptive strategies. By using developmentally appropriate adaptations, the five steps of problem solving can be employed by youth of all ages in solving a variety of stressors. While problem solving is a prominent component in the treatment of depression and anxiety, it is also used in the treatment of externalizing problems such as oppositional behavior, delinquency, truancy, substance abuse, and attention deficit hyperactivity dis.order (ADHD) (Chorpita and Daleiden 2009). Problem solving can be taught in order to help children control their aggressive behavior (e.g., Kazdin, Siegel, and Bass 1992) and is also included in behavioral parent training (e.g., Sanders 1999). With adolescents, problem solving is the key feature of effective negotiation and compromising with friends, caregivers, and authority figures (Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2005). Regardless of the symptoms or disorders being treated, problem solving is a systematic technique that slows impulsive behavior and allows children to convert what feels like a conundrum into a solu.tion. With coaching and practice, youth can learn to apply problem solving to a myriad of situations or conflicts and can learn, in effect, how to become their own therapist. References Abela, John R. Z., and Benjamin L. Hankin (Eds.). 2008. Handbook of Depression in Children and Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. American Psychiatric Association. 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed. rev.). Washington, DC: Author. Brent, David., and Kimbery Poling. 1997. Cognitive Therapy Treatment Manual forDepressed and Suicidal Youth. Pittsburgh, CA: University of Pittsburgh, Services for Teens at Risk. Chorpita, Bruce F., and Eric L. Daleiden. 2009. “Mapping Evidence-Based Treatments for Children and Adolescents: Application of the Distillation and Matching Model to 615 Treatments from 322 Randomized Trials.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77: 566–79. DOI: 10.1037/a0014565 Chorpita, Bruce F., and John R. Weisz. 2009. Modular Approach to Therapy for Childrenwith Anxiety, Depression, Trauma, or Conduct Problems (MATCH-ADTC). Satellite Beach, FL: Practice Wise. Clarke, Gregory, Peter M. Lewinsohn, and Hyman Hops. 1990. Leader’s Manual for Adolescent Groups: Coping with Depression Course. Portland, OR: Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research. Cohen, Judith A., Anthony P. Mannarino, and Esther Deblinger. 2006. Treating Trauma and Traumatic Grief in Children and Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Curry, John F., Karen C. Wells, David A. Brent, Gregory N. Clarke, Paul Rohde, Anne Marie Albano, … John S. March. 2005. Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Cognitive Behavior Therapy Manual: Introduction, Rationale, and Adolescent Sessions. Durham, NC: Duke University Medical Center, The TADS Team. D’Zurilla, Thomas J., and Marvin R. Goldfried. 1971. “Problem Solving and Behavior Modifi.cation.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78: 107–26. DOI: 10.1037/h0031360 Dadds, Mark R., and Paula M. Barrett. 2001. “Practitioner Review: Psychological Management of Anxiety Disorders in Childhood.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42: 999–1011. Gladstone, Tracy R. G., and Nadine J. Kaslow. 1995. “Depression and Attributions in Children and Adolescents: A Meta-analytic Review.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 23: 597–606. DOI: 10.1007/BF01447664 Jacobs, Rachel H., Mark A. Reinecke, Jackie K. Gollan, and Peter Kane. 2008. “Empirical Evidence of Cognitive Vulnerability for Depression among Children and Adolescents: A Cognitive Science and Developmental Perspective.” Clinical Psychology Review 28: 759–82. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2007.10.006 Kazdin, Alan E., Todd Siegel, and Deborah Bass. 1992. “Cognitive Problem-Solving Skills: Training and Parent Management Training in the Treatment of Antisocial Behavior in Children.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60: 733–47. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.60.5.733 Kendall, Phillip C., and Kristina A. Hedke. 2006. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Anxious Children: Therapist Manual (3rd ed.). Ardmore, PA: Workbook Publishing. Kendall, Phillip C., Jennifer L. Hudson, Muniya Choudhury, Alicia Webb, and Sandra Pimentel. 2005. Cognitive–Behavioral Treatment for Childhood Anxiety Disorders. In: Euthymia D. Hibbs and Peter S. Jensen (Eds.), Psychosocial Treatments for Child and Adolescent Disor.ders: Empirically Based Strategies for Clinical Practice (2nd ed., pp. 47–73). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Rapee, Ronald M., Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, Viviana Wuthrich, Maree Abbott, Jennifer Hudson, and Ann Wignall. 2006. The Cool Kids “Chilled” Adolescent Anxiety Program Therapist Manual. Sydney, Australia: Centre for Emotional Health, Macquarie University. Sanders, Matt R. 1999. “The Triple P: Positive Parenting Program: Towards an Empirically Validated Multilevel Parenting and Family Support Strategy for the Prevention of Behavior and Emotional Problems in Children.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 2: 71–90. DOI: 10.1023/A:1021843613840 Stark, Kevin, Sarah Schnoebelen, Jane Simpson, Jennifer Hargrave, and Rand Glenn. 2007. Treating Depressed Children: Therapist Manual for “ACTION.” Ardmore, PA: Workbook Publishing. Stark, Kevin, William Streusand, Prerna Arora, and Puja Patel. 2012. “Childhood Depression: The ACTION Treatment Program.” In Philip C. Kendall (Ed.), Child and Adolescent Therapy Fourth Edition: Cognitive–Behavioral Procedures (pp. 190–233). New York: Guilford Press. Vasey, Michael W., and Colin MacLeod. 2001. “Information-Processing Factors in Childhood Anxiety: A Review and Developmental Perspective.” In Michael W. Vasey and Mark R. Dadds (Eds.), The Developmental Psychopathology of Anxiety (pp. 253–77). New York: Oxford University Press. Weisz, John R., Christopher A. Thurber, Lynne Sweeney, Valerie D. Proffitt, and Gerald L. LeGagnoux. 1997. “Brief Treatment of Mild to Moderate Child Depression Using Primary and Secondary Control Enhancement Training.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65: 703–7. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.65.4.703 