18 Social Skills Training Lauren S. Krumholz, Ana M. Ugueto, Lauren C. Santucci, and John R. Weisz Introduction Learning to develop and maintain healthy interpersonal relationships is a critical developmental task for children and adolescents (here referred to as “youth”). Youth with anxiety and depression often have interpersonal difficulties, which may reflect limited understanding of social skills, problems with applying the skills in everyday life, or a combination of the two. These difficulties may arise in part because anxious and depressed youth often withdraw socially or react maladaptively, thus limiting their opportunities to learn and practice social skills and to establish healthy relationships. Anxious and depressed youth may increasingly face peer rejection and may experience vulnerability to bullying. Fortunately social skills can be learned and improved through practice. Social skills training (SST) can be an important component of comprehensive cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): it enriches interpersonal connections, which can matter so much to girls and boys with internalizing disorders and problems. SST typically addresses interpersonal engagement, building and maintaining friendships, communication and negotiation, assertiveness, and dealing with bullying (Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham, and Rapee 2011). These components are included in evidence-based treatments (EBTs) for social phobia (Beidel, Turner, and Morris 1998), post-traumatic stress disorder (Cohen, Mannarino, and Deblinger 2006), transdiag.nostic anxiety disorders (Rapee et al. 2006), and major depressive disorder (Clarke, Lewinsohn, and Hops 1990; Curry et al. 2003). CBT methods of SST include psycho-education, therapist modeling, interactive discussions about hypothetical and real-life examples, behavioral rehearsal, imaginal and in vivo exposures, and homework assignments. These methods can be used in group, individual (caregiver or child), and joint caregiver–child sessions. Ideally, SST Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. is tailored to each youth’s needs (e.g., specific knowledge deficits or performance issues), as informed by a social skills assessment (e.g., through interviews and observation). Throughout treatment, therapists should provide continual feedback and reinforcement to nurture young clients’ acquisition and use of the skills. In the next section we describe training in five key social skills, drawing from the aforemen.tioned EBTs and our own clinical and research experience. Key Features of Interpersonal Engagement Skills Interpersonal engagement skills training improves youngsters’ ability to navigate social interactions using developmentally appropriate verbal and nonverbal behavior. This training can be useful for anxious and depressed youth in general, but it may be partic.ularly valuable for youth with social phobia. Training focuses on using body language and voice quality, reading social cues, performing greetings and introductions, starting and maintaining conversations, listening and remembering what others have said, and joining and leaving group conversations (Beidel et al. 1998; Rapee et al. 2006). Methods for teaching these skills include didactic instruction, modeling, and behavioral rehearsal. Therapists should begin by providing youth and their caregivers with a rationale as to the importance of interpersonal engagement skills (e.g., these skills help kids form friendships and have positive interactions with others); then they should describe which skills will be targeted. Therapists should also explain the need to practice social skills. In addition to noting that everyone can benefit from practice and that this is a good way to receive feedback about your strengths and areas for improvement, therapists may ask youth for examples of skills they have learned through practice (e.g., riding a bike, playing an instrument) – thus illustrating that learning interpersonal skills is like learning other skills youth have already mastered. To help young clients better comprehend social cues and use body language and voice quality effectively, therapists should discuss nonverbal behavior that helps people communicate (e.g., facial expressions, eye contact, physical proximity). It can be beneficial to model inappropriate social behavior (e.g., frowning, looking and standing away from the conversational partner), and have youth identify nonverbal errors. Then therapists can model appropriate nonverbal behavior and request feedback, including asking which of the two people portrayed in the examples most kids would prefer to talk to, and why. Additionally, Weisz and colleagues recommend video-recording youth while they are presenting both a “negative” and a “positive” self. This video is then viewed with the youth to facilitate a discussion of differences in presentation style (Weisz, Thurber, Sweeney, Proffitt, and LeGagnoux 1997). Assisting youth to perform greetings includes teaching them such simple skills as saying “hello” in a pleasant, audible voice and looking at the person when they speak. Another core skill is initiating and maintaining conversations; this involves knowing when to start a conversation (e.g., when first introduced to someone, when seeing a familiar person), how to start a conversation (e.g., smile, comment on something you have in common) with different types of people (e.g., strangers, familiar others), and how to choose an appropriate conversational topic. “Safe” conversational topics for youth include current events, school activities, and common interests (e.g., music and sports). Maintaining conversations involves asking open-ended questions (“What are you doing this summer?”), giving another person time to respond, and recognizing when and how to change topics (e.g., when there is a pause in conversation, use a transitional statement: “Another thing I wanted to talk about is…”). Because anxiety and depression can negatively impact concentration, training should also include practice in listening and remembering information (e.g., a person’s name and hobbies) during conversations. To train youth to join and leave group conversations, therapists should use role-plays of relevant real-world scenarios (e.g., joining adolescents at a lunch table, or walking away from children playing kickball). Additional interpersonal engagement skills (e.g., giving and receiving compli.ments, talking on the telephone) can also be taught, depending on a youth’s particular areas of difficulty. During interpersonal engagement skills training, therapists should first model the skills and then have children engage in behavioral rehearsal, both in session and through therapeutic homework, while continually providing praise for effort and constructive feedback to help shape skill development. Key Features of Friendship Skills Friendship skills encompass ways to build and maintain healthy friendships (e.g., Beidel et al. 1998). Friendship skills are often taught to youth with social phobia or depression, and to others who have withdrawn from social interactions. Training in friendship skills involves discussing suitable places to meet friends, inviting children to social activities, reading social cues to gauge someone’s level of interest, maintaining consistent contact with friends, and communicating about how to treat others in friendships. Teaching friendship skills in a group format allows group members to work together, contribute their ideas, and role-play skills with others. When discussing where to meet friends, therapists should encourage brainstorming of different places and activities and should create a list of options. If needed, thera.pists can make suggestions (e.g., school) and youth can elaborate (e.g., on the school playground, or in art class). Other possible options are community centers, places of worship, and extracurricular programs. Skill in inviting others to join activities must be complemented by skill in (i) reading social cues and using realistic appraisal of whether the other person is interested; (ii) identifying simple joint activities (e.g., going to a movie); and (iii) using interper.sonal engagement skills (e.g., smile, eye contact) to extend an invitation. It is useful to role-play how to extend an initial invitation (e.g., “Want to shoot hoops later?”) and to help children determine another person’s interest level through nonverbal (e.g., facial expression) and verbal cues. Given that depressed and socially anxious youth often mis.interpret cues and assume others are not interested, therapists should listen for overly negative or unrealistic interpretations of others’ neutral behavior and, if needed, help youth make more realistic appraisals. Instruction will also be needed in how to proceed depending on the other person’s response (e.g., if the response is affirmative, schedule a time for the activity; if it is neutral, ask at a later time; if it is negative, leave that person alone and consider asking someone else). It is beneficial for youth to discuss and practice how they would accept and decline invitations from others in a prosocial manner. For training in maintaining friendships, therapists should remind their clients that, after making a friend, they need to take steps to maintain the friendship. Therapists can then teach skills for sustaining friendships (e.g., staying in regular contact, helping friends when they need support, letting friends have other friends), while also eliciting ideas from youth about how to maintain relationships. Following discussions of these friendship skills, behavioral rehearsal is needed. Therapists can model how to invite someone to join in an activity; then they can encourage youth to role-play scenarios generated by the therapist (e.g., “When inviting your chemistry lab partner to get ice-cream, you say…”) and by themselves. Discussing and role-playing problematic social situations with friends can help facilitate skill application. After behavioral rehearsal, therapists should offer praise and corrective feedback and should request constructive comments from the youth participating in each role-play (e.g., ask each child what went well during the role- play: “Good job smiling and asking me to the game” – and what could be improved: “It would be helpful if you looked me in the eyes”). Homework assignments (e.g., inviting someone to an activity this week) will help youth practice these skills. Peer generalization activities, which involve arranging interactions between youth learning social skills and socially adept peers, also provide opportunities to practice friendship and interpersonal engagement skills (see Beidel et al. 1998 for a more detailed description). Key Features of Communication and Negotiation Skills Youth with anxiety and depression may have difficulty communicating, negotiating, and building lasting relationships. Communication includes sending information to others (e.g., by speaking) and receiving information from them (e.g., by listening). Youth can be taught specific strategies to improve communication skills and to become a clearer speaker and a more active listener (Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2003; Rapee et al. 2006). Failure to say what you mean with accuracy, or to hear what others say without judgment, leads to communication failure and conflict. When conflict arises, youth should be taught to listen carefully, in order to understand others’ points of view. Listening does not mean that you agree; it simply means that you hear what the person is saying. To illustrate the rules of communication, we will use the example of Hannah telling Kate that she interrupts her. While the speaker (Hannah) is talking, the listener (Kate) should not ignore, interrupt, or give advice. Instead, Kate should try to understand Hannah’s feelings and point of view while being patient and respectful. Once Hannah is finished, Kate should respond by restating what Hannah said and summarizing how Hannah feels (e.g., “It sounds like you feel disrespected when I interrupt you”). Then Kate can explain her perception of the situation by describing how she feels (e.g., “I was excited to tell my story”), how she reacted (e.g., “I didn’t realize I interrupted you. I thought you were done talking”), and what happened – without giving an opinion (e.g., “I started telling my story before you finished”). After both parties share their experiences, Kate may offer to change her behavior (e.g., “I’ll try not to interrupt you”) or Hannah may suggest how Kate’s behavior could change (e.g., “Please try not to interrupt me”). This is but one example; therapists should encourage their young clients to practice communication skills using their own local idioms. By communicating clearly, youth can more effectively inform others of their feelings about an activating event, which may lead to behavior change as well as to fewer future conflicts. Negotiation and compromise are critical to any relationship, whether between family members, friends, or romantic partners. Therapists should teach youth that the key to compromising is listening when there is conflict, identifying its source, and using problem-solving to resolve it (Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2003). The reader can consult the problem-solving chapter (Chapter 17) for a description of the five basic steps. When interpersonal disputes are being negotiated, each person involved should participate in solving the problem. For example, if an adolescent wants a later curfew, both the adolescent and caregiver should volunteer possible solutions. Additionally, Clarke and colleagues (1990) recommend that each person mark solu.tions with a plus or minus sign, to identify which ones are unanimously agreeable. Next, each person should identify strengths and weaknesses in every solution and whether or not (s)he favors it; and each person should be positive and fair in his/her assessment. The two parties must then agree on a solution, which, for one or both, will mean compromising. For instance, the adolescent may want curfew extended by an hour and the caregiver may not wish to extend curfew at all, but they agree to an extended curfew of 30 minutes. Finally, once a solution is reached, the exact details should be written in a contract (Clarke et al. 1990) that states what each person is expected to do, what will happen if either person defaults, and what length of time the agreement is for. Neither party can change the contract until it expires, as it may take time for the agreement to work. A contract for an extended curfew may read: Alisha’s curfew is 10:30 p.m. on weekends. If she arrives at 10:31 p.m. or later, she can’t go out the next weekend. If not home by 10:45 p.m., Mom will call her cell phone to see where she is. If Alisha keeps her curfew for one month, Mom will consider extending her curfew. Negotiation and compromise are particularly relevant to adolescents seeking greater independence (e.g., when they want to borrow the family car), but may also be applicable to younger children (e.g., when they want to spend the night at a friend’s house). Key Features of Assertiveness Skills Depressed and anxious youth often have trouble acting assertively – for example, refusing unreasonable or unwanted requests, asking others to change their behavior, or interacting with authority figures (e.g., teachers, coaches, parents). Instead they may react passively – for instance by believing that others are taking advantage of them, by feeling powerless to change their situation, and by avoiding confrontation – or aggres.sively – for example, by believing that others are trying to take advantage of them and confronting them directly, lashing out physically or verbally. In contrast, assertive youth stand up for themselves by expressing their thoughts and feelings in an appropriate way, which does not harm or violate the rights of others and is consistent with their culture and context. The CBT approach to assertiveness (e.g, Beidel et al. 1998; Clarke et al. 1990; Curry et al. 2003; Rapee et al. 2006) often involves teaching steps like these: 1. Recognize your emotion in the situation. 2. Recognize the emotions of others in the situation and let them know you under.stand how they feel. 3. Tell others how you feel about the situation using “I” statements that avoid crit.icizing other people (e.g., “I think/don’t think,” “I feel/don’t feel,” “I want/ don’t want,” “I agree/disagree”) (Curry et al. 2003). 4. Practice giving brief, honest, tactful feedback when denying a request, asking for some course of action, correcting others’ misperceptions, or offering an alternative solution. Therapists should also help young clients pay attention to their nonverbal behaviors (how they look and present themselves to others) when acting asser.tively. Youth should stand up straight, with shoulders back, maintain eye contact, and speak in an audible, firm, and pleasant voice, so that others can hear and understand what they are saying. Therapists should be aware of cultural differences and avoid teaching behaviors that may come across as rude or disrespectful instead of assertive. In addition, therapists should emphasize the importance of safety in the context of assertiveness training (e.g., a child in an abusive situation should not be told to be assertive). Therapists should provide thorough practice of both verbal and nonverbal assertive behaviors. This can begin with having youth list situations in which they feel taken advantage of (e.g., kids cutting in line, or a friend asking to copy home.work) and then having them role-play each, starting with easier ones. Youth can role-play with the therapist, with other adults at the clinic, with parents, siblings, and therapy group members. Clarke and colleagues (1990) describe a technique called “assertive imagery,” in which adolescents take a mental photograph of a situation they want to change and then convert that photograph into a movie in which they act assertively and others respond in the desired manner. Role-playing a challenging scenario is a way to gain experience as well as confidence. Assertiveness training often may need to be combined with realistic appraisals, since the youth’ distorted interpretations of how others perceive them could interfere with their willingness to exhibit assertive behavior. For example, socially anxious children often fail to act assertively because they think others will not like them if they stand up for themselves or make a demand. Thus young clients may need guidance from ther.apists for changing overly negative and unrealistic appraisals into more accurate and realistic ones during assertiveness training. Key Features of Dealing with Bullying Skills Bullies often target youth who are anxious or submissive or whose reaction makes the bully feel powerful. Assertiveness skills are an important first step in reducing peer victimization. At times, however, enhanced assertiveness is not enough, and youth with anxiety and depression will need additional strategies. Moreover, being assertive in situations of physical bullying could provoke an escalation in violence. Thus, for physical aggression, youth should speak to an authority figure they trust, who can implement environmental changes. The strategies below – as outlined in Rapee et al. (2006) – are most appropriate for teasing or verbal aggression: 1. Help the youth identify someone to talk to about what is happening and how (s)he feels. 2. Encourage the youth to stay close to safe people – for instance, trusted peers or teachers – so as to reduce the likelihood of bullying and increase the likelihood that the bully will be caught. Identify times during the day when the youth is more isolated or away from authority figures (say, on the school bus, at lunch, in recess between classes) and brainstorm ways to expand the audience. If the bully speaks loudly, (s)he may have a greater chance of being caught. Therefore brainstorm how to get the bully to raise his/her voice (e.g., “I didn’t catch that. Could you say that one more time?” or gesturing toward his/her ear to suggest the child did not hear what was said) and then role-play these new responses. 3. Teach unexpected ways to respond to bullies. For example, rather than retreating or becoming defensive, angry, or fearful, help the youth identify “clever come-backs” (Rapee et al. 2006), remain calm and uninterested, or ignore the bully’s comments. In session, ask the youth to recall situations where bullying occurred, brainstorm what (s)he could have said or done differently, and consider how the bully might have responded. Then rehearse these strategies and decide which of them may be most effective in future encounters. Caregivers should also be taught skills to help their children deal with bullying. Caregivers can learn ways to support the development, rehearsal, and implemen tation of the preventative and alternative responses described above; they can be a resource for their child by talking about the bullying, helping to plan ways for the child to be near peers and teachers throughout the day, and so on. In cases of physical aggres.sion, caregivers should seek assistance from the school. With the rise in technology use among youth, cyber-bullying is an increasingly prevalent form of peer-victimization. Cyber-bullying differs from more traditional bullying in that the perpetrator can remain largely anonymous, bullying can occur any time, and derogatory messages or rumors can be widely and rapidly distrib.uted. Many of the skills reviewed apply to youth who experience cyber-bullying. Specifically, rather than responding with anger or defensiveness – which may per.petuate bullying – these youth should ignore the message or otherwise not respond. They should also keep evidence of cyber-bullying (e.g., save texts or emails, take screenshots of social media sites) in case this information needs to be shared with authority figures. Any threats of violence, sexually explicit messages, or child pornography should be carefully considered, and therapists should consult the ethical code or guidelines of their local professional body and relevant legislation in order to determine how to proceed. Competence in Treating Anxiety Disorders  and Depression Anxiety Anxious youth may be particularly vulnerable to impairments in social skills (Kingery, Erdley, Marshall, Whitaker, and Reuter 2010). These social skills deficits may derive from avoidance of social situations – due for instance to fear of negative evaluation, or to fear of doing something embarrassing – which limits social learning opportunities (Rubin and Burgess 2001). Other anxious youth may show maladaptive interpersonal behavior in an effort to protect themselves from perceived threat; so for instance a boy with post-traumatic stress might lash out against peers viewed as threat.ening (Marsee, Weems, and Taylor 2008). Both social avoidance and hostility can prevent anxious youth from acquiring social skills, while simultaneously supporting the belief that social situations are risky and hard to navigate. In some cases, anxious youth may know social skills but not apply them due to interfering anxiety: they would become paralyzed by fear when meeting new people (Kingery et al. 2010). Despite the cause of interpersonal difficulties, anxious youth will likely benefit from SST. Since symptoms associated with anxiety (e.g., misconstrual of the danger of social situations and heightened physiological arousal) can inhibit interpersonal behavior, therapists often need to adapt SST to address the needs of anxious youth. These youth frequently overestimate the likelihood of negative events and underestimate their ability to cope if a negative event were to occur (Dadds and Barrett 2001). Therefore it is important to inquire about children’s negative predictions (e.g., “What are you afraid is going to happen?”) and then, following the application of each skill, ask whether these predictions came true. Trying out new skills – such as inviting someone for a play date, acting assertively, or confronting bullies – may be particularly anxiety provoking. In building these skills, it is important to use a graduated approach with anxious youth. It may be helpful to construct a fear hierarchy of behaviors in different situations to guide progression through SST. If elevated levels of anxiety persist even after behavioral rehearsal or real-life application of skills, a graduated exposure per.spective would suggest that the rehearsal or application may not have lasted long enough to lead to reduced anxiety. Hypothetical scenarios can be designed and sequenced for repeated behavioral rehearsal until habituation is achieved. Anxious youth may also have social interaction habits that make them less appealing to others (e.g., timidity, submissiveness, poor eye contact). These habits can be targeted for practice as part of rehearsing improved nonverbal interaction skills. Including caregivers in SST can support treatment gains, particularly for younger anxious children (Barrett 2000). Caregivers’ usual reactions to their children’s anxiety can range from being overly empathic and protective to being highly intolerant and critical. Since the preferred approach to helping youngsters manage anxiety and improve social skills is not necessarily intuitive, therapists may need to model recom.mended ways of interacting with anxious youth during SST (e.g., they may show enthusiasm for treatment, use differential attention to reinforce bravery, praise the child’s efforts and accomplishments, accept and tolerate the child’s distress). Caregivers may benefit from knowing which skills their child is learning and practicing; that knowledge will enable them to support the child with encouragement, praise, and feedback on use of the skills. Caregivers may also need to learn how to manage their own emotional reactions to the child’s distress and to accept that there will be mistakes and setbacks on the child’s path to acquiring improved social skills and greater independence in applying these skills. Depression Youth with depression frequently experience interpersonal problems that seem to be reciprocal and transactional, in that impaired social relationships can lead to depression and depression can negatively impact relationships with others (Pilowsky 2009; Rudolph, Flynn, and Abaied 2008). Social skills deficits can also result from limited social interaction, which may stem from low energy, fatigue, or feelings of hopelessness (Rudolph, Hammen, and Burge 1994). Some depressed youth under.stand effective social skills, but may find that their depression interferes with applying them in everyday life (Stark et al. 2008). Irritability, which can accompany depression, may lead to conflict-laden relationships and eventual isolation. The accumulation of negative interactions can exacerbate depressed youth’ negative beliefs about self (e.g., “I’m unlikeable”) (Rudolph et al. 2008). SST may help address depression by enhancing both interpersonal relationships and self-perceptions. Therapists should be attuned to common difficulties for depressed youth and adjust SST accordingly. When depression includes distorted thoughts (e.g., “No one likes me”) and negative core beliefs (e.g., “I’m ineffective”), youth should be encouraged to gather contradictory evidence (e.g., “Megan seemed to like talking to me,” “I got Max to help with our group project”). Rigid, all-or-nothing thinking (e.g., “I’m right and he is totally wrong” or “If I give in now, I’ll never get what I want”) may require modification. In these and other situations, therapists may need to use cognitive restructuring to address unhelpful thoughts and negative core beliefs before and during SST. Interpersonal engagement skills may be particularly helpful for socially isolated youngsters. In presenting the rationale for SST to depressed youth, therapists can rightly emphasize that improving social skills helps combat depression because engaging in positive activities with others is mood boosting. Moreover, liking and being liked by others helps people feel happier. Because depression often entails magnifying negative events, overgeneralizing predictions of undesirable outcomes, incorrectly taking personal responsibility for negative events, minimizing positive events and attributes, and giving up at the first sign of difficulty or failure, therapists need to prepare depressed youth to persist in using their skills, even when the evidence of success is mixed and the desired outcomes are not imme.diately accomplished. This is especially true in complex social situations, in which others’ responses are difficult to predict or control (e.g., even after an assertive response, a bully may continue bullying). Incorporating caregivers into SST can help facilitate and maintain treatment gains, especially for younger children. Caregivers may find their depressed children difficult to be with when they are sad or irritable, and may respond in negative ways. Therapists can help caregivers understand factors (noted earlier) that impede the development of children’s social skills. Caregivers should encourage their children’s use of social skills (e.g., during home practice) and provide positive reinforcement for practicing learned skills, with the objective of building self-efficacy related to interpersonal behavior. In addition, caregivers can help their children challenge negative automatic thoughts that interfere with the use of improved social skills. Competence in Treating both Children and Adolescents Children Identifying anxious and depressed children’s areas of difficulty with the performance of effective social skills and intervening at a young age can help minimize the build-up of negative sequelae associated with social isolation, conflictual relationships, and bullying. When assessing a child’s social skills and the factors that interfere with their effective use, therapists should rely heavily on information provided by caregivers and on direct observation, because children may not fully understand, or be able to articulate, their challenges in the social domain. Therapists should consider children’s developmental level in the realms of cognitive, emotional, and social functioning in order to fit the intervention to their abilities. Younger children and children with lower cognitive functioning will likely benefit from simpler explanations of treatment procedures and activities and from ample modeling from therapists. SST also needs to be adjusted to children’s attention span (e.g., there should be frequent breaks for those with difficulties in sustaining attention). Children with underdeveloped emotional skills may benefit from learning emotion identification (i.e., how to correctly label feelings and differentiate between varying levels of emotional distress) and emotion regulation (e.g., relaxation) prior to starting SST. Children who are socially immature may require highly explicit instruction in social skills before engaging in role-play. More generally, therapists can employ the following recommendations to match children’s developmental stage during SST. Children will benefit from concrete, active, and engaging approaches to learning and applying social skills. For example, when teaching young children about social cues such as facial expressions, therapists can have them cut out magazine pictures of people showing different emotions (Beidel et al. 1998). Children will need opportunities for behavioral rehearsal with different types of people (e.g., clinic receptionist, other children, family members) to increase generalization and real-world applicability of the skills. It also is important to start with easier scenarios, so that children experience success, which can build their confidence to try more difficult role-plays. Therapists should be aware of common social dilemmas for children and should solicit input about challenging social situations, so role-plays can be tailored to address children’s key issues (e.g., the child is excluded by others on the playground). In addition, therapists should understand how social difficulties are manifested by children of various ages. For example, peer aggression in the preschool years tends to involve brief episodes, but in middle and later childhood aggression is more likely to involve repeated and prolonged victimizing of particular children (Kochenderfer and Ladd 1997; Monks, Ruiz, and Val 2002). To enhance children’s motivation to participate in SST activities, therapists may need to implement a reward system for their effort. Rewards should be proportional to the task (e.g., stickers for engaging in role-plays) and meaningful to the child. Therapists should flexibly match the amount of caregiver inclusion in treatment with the maturity of the child and the nature of the caregiver–child relationship. Younger children may benefit from more caregiver involvement, as they frequently require caregivers’ assistance in practicing interpersonal skills. Therapists should work with caregivers to design opportunities for children to develop friendships and use the skills they learned (e.g., organize play dates and trips to places where children often gather, such as parks). Therapists can also teach caregivers techniques to enhance their children’s acquisition and use of social skills (e.g., reducing reassurance, building children’s independence, encouraging and praising children’s use of skills, and ensuring completion of therapeutic homework). Adolescents When working with adolescents, therapists should teach and adapt skills to the developmental – cognitive, emotional, social – level of the teen. Even adolescents with reasonably effective emotion regulation skills and capacity to change their behavior may have difficulty learning and implementing new social skills. Additionally, some youth may be reluctant to discuss problems related to interper.sonal skills or bullying for fear of embarrassment, while socially immature adoles.cents may find role-playing silly and may have difficulty practicing specific behaviors without laughing. On the other hand, socially mature adolescents may find certain therapeutic activities to be overly childish, if these are not presented in a developmentally appropriate manner. Although the core components of each social skill are the same for children and adolescents, therapists should adjust to each individual how the skills are taught and should tailor examples to the problems the adolescent is facing or may experience. As adolescents begin dating, working as an employee, playing on a sports team, running for student body office, or pursing their own interests in music, art, and technology, they will need to learn appropriate ways to voice their opinion, stand up for their rights, and not let peers (e.g., romantic partners, co-workers, team members) or authority figures (e.g., teachers, parents, coaches, bosses) take advantage of them. Relationships with friends become more complex during adolescence, and individuals who were once friends may become enemies. Additionally, dating, attending unchap.eroned parties, fitting in or being “cool,” and desiring more independence take on greater importance. Therapists should view these challenges as opportunities to teach adolescents how to defend themselves from bullies, negotiate for greater responsibil.ities and privileges with authority figures, say “no” to unwanted offers of drugs, alcohol, and sexual advances in a firm, assertive manner, and compromise with friends and romantic partners to solve small disagreements and avoid greater conflicts. Therapists can frame the skills and related behaviors as a way for adolescents to more effectively advocate for themselves and their needs, and as skills to be used with a variety of people in a multitude of situations. When role-playing, the adolescent client can first act as the peer she is having difficulty with, while the therapist acts as the client, modeling how the adolescent could respond. Next the roles can be reversed, so that the teen client practices acting as herself/himself. In these role-plays, therapists should be careful to not agree or “give in” to the client or offer to change behavior too quickly, as another person is unlikely to do so. Common Obstacles to Competent Practice and Methods to Overcome Them Understanding obstacles that can interfere with SST is crucial to effectively teaching social skills to youth with depression and anxiety. One set of obstacles can derive from failure to conduct a thorough assessment designed to inform treatment planning. A comprehensive assessment involves multiple methods (e.g., observation, interviews, and validated questionnaires) and informants (e.g., child, caregiver, and teacher) focused on the youth’s current functioning and abilities (Whitcomb and Merrell 2013). Collecting information from independent observers may be especially impor.tant in the assessment of social skills, as skills may differ across settings and youth may have limited insight into their own behavior. The social skills assessment should reveal the youth’s strengths and most severe problems and areas of functional impairment. For example, a boy with social phobia who is bullied may have a great sense of humor, but significant difficulty staying close to others to maintain an audience – a helpful strategy for dealing with bullying. In this case, treatment should help him manage anxiety in social situations prior to targeting skills for dealing with bullying. Assessment of functioning and abilities should occur throughout treatment to evaluate progress and to guide treatment. Furthermore, therapists must be aware of a family’s cultural background and appreciate contextual factors that are salient for a youth (e.g., cultural, ethnic, gender, and religious issues). For example, teaching an Orthodox Jewish adolescent girl to shake hands with a man could violate cultural rules about appropriate touch between men and women. Additional obstacles can stem from insufficient collaboration among therapists, youth, and caregivers. Through close collaboration and a strong working relationship, therapists can identify interpersonal skills deficits and design treatment to maximize success. Therapists should move at the child’s pace, striking a balance between chal.lenging the youth to use the learned skills and understanding the difficulties that this may present. A climate of openness to feedback will help caregivers and youth feel more comfortable discussing setbacks in treatment, how the youth is progressing, and which skills require additional practice. Another obstacle is the therapist’s hesitation to model interpersonal skills and to have children engage in role-plays. While didactic presentations and interactive discussions about social skills are important, therapists must also ensure that young clients have ample opportunities to observe and practice social skills. Therapists may hesitate because they are reluctant to increase their clients’ anxiety, or they may feel unprepared to manage distress from youth and caregivers during role-plays or exposure tasks. Learning to appreciate the rationale and empirical foundation of these tech.niques and understanding long-term gains that result from short-term distress during these activities can help to assuage therapists’ hesitancy. Failure to adequately include caregivers in treatment is an additional obstacle. Therapists should take steps to ensure appropriate caregiver involvement. Inquiring about barriers to involvement and initiating joint problem solving to address those barriers can increase caregiver participation (e.g., when caregivers have busy schedules, therapists can try to remain flexible as to when they are available to meet). Ideally, caregivers will learn the same skills as their children, in order to act as coaches, encouraging and reinforcing children’s application of social skills at home, at school, and in the community. Ongoing communi.cation between youth and caregivers about the skills being learned and how practice is working can help caregivers play a crucial role and help youth take ownership of the skills. Another obstacle involves children’s lack of motivation to participate in SST. As noted earlier, therapists should make learning social skills fun, engaging, and interac.tive and should provide encouragement and labeled praise for effort (e.g., “Great job looking me in the eyes and smiling when you said hello”). When youth resist role-playing, therapists can use humor and funny situations (e.g., the therapist can first demonstrate the wrong way to join a group and then give each child a “scripted” personality for a role-play) or can have the whole group complete the first several role-plays together. Young people’s desire to actively participate in SST can also be increased by tying the skills to their goals for therapy (e.g., “Today we are going to talk about how to start conversations with people; this will help you make new friends like you said you wanted when we first started meeting”). Some youngsters may also benefit from a reward system designed to enhance motivation. Finally, one of the most common obstacles is the difficulty generalizing learned social skills and extending them to new people and new situations. The goal of generalization must be actively targeted by therapists. If youth are not progressing in the generaliza.tion of skills, therapists need to carefully consider the source of interference. Has the therapist arranged for ample opportunities for the child to practice the skills with dif.ferent people in various situations? Has the youth received corrective feedback follow.ing behavioral rehearsal? Are cognitive distortions preventing the successful application of skills? Is the youth afraid that, even if (s)he exhibits good interpersonal skills, (s)he will not achieve the desired outcomes? The most frequent reason for the limited gener.alization of skills is a lack of practice outside of therapy sessions. Home practice assign.ments are key. If these assignments are not completed, therapists should openly discuss with caregivers and youth the factors interfering with practice and should work to find solutions. It can also be helpful for therapists to start with smaller homework requests and gradually increase them as youth successfully complete assignments. Including SST can be critical to success in CBT for anxious and depressed youth, as it builds skills that generate powerful payoffs in the social world of young people. References Barrett, Paula M. 2000. “Treatment of Childhood Anxiety: Developmental Aspects.” Clinical Psychology Review, 20: 479–94. Beidel, Deborah C., Samuel M. Turner, and Tracey L. Morris. 1998. Social Effectiveness  Therapy for Children: A Treatment Manual. Unpublished manuscript. Clarke, Gregory, Peter M. Lewinsohn, and Hyman Hops. 1990. Leader’s Manual for Adolescent Groups: Coping with Depression Course. Portland, OR: Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research. Cohen, Judith A., Anthony P. Mannarino, and Esther Deblinger. 2006. Treating Trauma and Traumatic Grief in Children and Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Curry, John F., Karen C. Wells, David A. Brent, Gregory N. Clarke, Paul Rohde, Anne Marie Albano, … John S. March. 2003. Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Cognitive Behavior Therapy Manual: Introduction, Rationale, and Adolescent Sessions. Durham, NC: Duke University Medical Center, The TADS Team. Dadds, Mark R., and Paula M. Barrett. 2001. “Practitioner Review: Psychological Management of Anxiety Disorders in Childhood.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42: 999–1011. Kingery, Julie N., Cynthia A. Erdley, Katherine C. Marshall, Kyle G. Whitaker, and Tyson R. Reuter. 2010. “Peer Experiences of Anxious and Socially Withdrawn Youth: An Integra.tive Review of the Developmental and Clinical Literature.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 13: 91–128. Kochenderfer, Becky J., and Gary W. Ladd. 1997. “Victimized Children’s Responses to Peers’ Aggression: Behaviors Associated with Reduced versus Continued Victimization.” Development and Psychopathology, 9: 59–73. Marsee, Monica A., Carl F. Weems, and Leslie K. Taylor. 2008. “Exploring the Association between Aggression and Anxiety in Youth: A Look at Aggressive Subtypes, Gender, and Social Cognition.” Journal of Child and Family Studies, 17: 154–68. Monks, Claire P., Rosario O. Ruiz, & Elena T. Val. 2002. “Unjustified Aggression in Preschool.” Aggressive Behavior, 2: 458–76. Pilowsky, Daniel J. 2009. “Depression: Causes and Risk Factors.” In Joseph M. Rey and Boris Birmaher (Eds.), Treating Child and Adolescent Depression (pp. 17–22). Philadephia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Rapee, Ronald M., Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, Viviana Wuthrich, Maree Abbott, Jennifer Hudson, and Anne Wignall. 2006. Cool Kids Child and Adolescent Anxiety Program Therapist Manual. Sydney: Centre for Emotional Health, Macquarie University. Rubin, Kenneth H., and Kim B. Burgess. 2001. “Social Withdrawal and Anxiety.” In Michael W. Vasey and Mark R. Dadds (Eds.), The Developmental Psychopathology of Anxiety (pp. 407–34). New York: Oxford University Press. Rudolph, Karen D., Megan Flynn, and Jamie L. Abaied. 2008. “A Developmental Perspective on Interpersonal Theories of Youth Depression.” In John R. Z. Abela and Benjamin L.  Hankin (Eds.), Handbook of Depression in Children and Adolescents (pp. 224–49). New York: Guilford Press. Rudolph, Karen D., Constance Hammen, and Dorli Burge. 1994. “Interpersonal Functioning and Depressive Symptoms in Childhood: Addressing the Issues of Specificity and Comor.bidity.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 22 (3): 355–71. Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14: 89–109. Stark, Kevin D., Jennifer Hargrave, Brooke Hersh, Michelle Greenberg, Jenny Herren, and Melissa Fisher. 2008. “Treatment of Childhood Depression: The ACTION Treatment Program.” In John R. Z. Abela and Benjamin L. Hankin (Eds.), Handbook of Depression in Children and Adolescents (pp. 224–49). New York: Guilford Press. Weisz, John R., Christopher A. Thurber, Lynne Sweeney, Valerie D. Proffitt, and Gerald L. LeGagnoux. 1997. “Brief Treatment of Mild-to-Moderate Child Depression Using Primary and Secondary Control Enhancement Training.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65: 703–7. Whitcomb, Sara A., and Kenneth W. Merrell. 2013. Behavioral, Social, and Emotional Assessment of Children and Adolescents (4th ed.). New York: Routledge. 