16 Managing Maladaptive Mood and Arousal Donna B. Pincus, Ryan J. Madigan, Caroline E. Kerns, Christina Hardway, and Jonathan S. Comer Introduction Effective regulation of maladaptive mood and arousal is considered an essential skill for enhancing youth’s resilience and fostering healthy developmental and mental health outcomes (Ciccetti, Ackerman, and Izard 1995; Eisenberg, Fabes, and Guthrie 1997). Learning to identify and regulate negative mood states is a critical skill for youth to develop in order to successfully navigate everyday, developmentally appropriate activities (Compas 1987). Youth with anxiety and depression often show difficulties with managing their maladaptive mood and arousal; thus it is not surprising that empirically supported treatments for internalizing disorders in youth focus largely on helping the youth to develop these skills (Suveg and Zeman 2004). As shown in Sburlati, Schniering, Lyneham and Rapee (2011), there are several empirically supported cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) skills that specifically target children’s and adolescents’ maladaptive mood and arousal: (i) emotion identification, expression, and regulation; (ii) progressive muscle relaxation (PMR); (iii) applied tension; and (iv) breathing re-training. These techniques are included in numerous empirically supported treatment (EST) manuals for anxiety and depression in youth (Ollendick and King 2004). Any effective training of clinicians who will be imple.menting CBT with children and adolescents with internalizing disorders should incorporate specific training in the implementation of skills for managing maladaptive mood and arousal. In the present chapter each of these evidence-based skills for managing maladaptive mood and arousal are described one by one. For each skill, we describe key features of how a therapist would implement it competently, we address how it would be incorporated into anxiety and depression treatments, we make recommendations for developmentally appropriate adaptations, and we discuss how therapists can overcome common obstacles to its effective implementation. Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Emotion Identification, Expression, and Regulation Overview Youth with internalizing disorders often exhibit difficulties identifying, expressing, and regulating their emotions. These difficulties may reflect developmentally appro.priate cognitive and emotional limitations, as well as underlying deficits specific to the etiology of anxiety and depression. Building skill sets to deal with such difficulties constitutes an important developmental task for youth without psychopathology and is a critical part of CBT for youth with internalizing disorders. In consequence, competent CBT practice for youth internalizing disorders requires that therapists teach youth to identify, understand, accept, and express a variety of different emo.tions, as well as to monitor escalating negative emotions and subsequently engage in activities to regulate intense negative emotions (Sburlati et al. 2011). Not only are these skills themselves important components of CBT, but proficiency in these areas provides a foundation for additional CBT coping strategies such as cognitive restruc.turing, mood monitoring, developing trauma narratives, engaging in exposures, and so on. Therefore it is imperative that therapists are able to scaffold these skills, so that difficulties in processing and regulating emotions will not adversely affect skill acquisition and treatment engagement. Emotion identification, expression, and regulation techniques are typically included in EST manuals for anxiety disorders in general (Kendall and Hedke 2006; Rapee et al. 2006); for panic disorder (Pincus, Ehrenreich, and Mattis 2008) and post-traumatic stress disorder (Cohen, Mannarino, and Deblinger 2006) in particular; and for major depressive disorder, too (Brent and Poling 1997; Lewinsohn, Clarke, Hops, and Andrews 1990; Curry et al. 2005). Session structures vary across manuals but  typically involve a combination of individual (youth or parent alone) and family (youth and parent together) involvement, depending on developmental level, the nature of a youth’s relationship with parents, and the stage of treatment. Parent involvement promotes parent emotion regulation skills, emotion regulation modeling, and par.ents’ providing youth with supportive coaching. In addition, ESTs target emotion identification, expression, and regulation training through a combination of targeted treatment modules (see, e.g., “Identifying Anxious Feelings,” in Kendall and Hedke 2006) and informal components of related treatment modules (for instance, emotion identification and expression may begin during early rapport building, as identified in Brent and Poling 1997; Cohen et al. 2006). Therapists who are less familiar with CBT may overlook these skill areas or may address them inadequately, either due to gaps in their knowledge of behavioral theory or as a result of their relying inflexibly on a particular treatment manual. Even seasoned therapists who typically address these areas might benefit from understanding additional ways to teach clients in greater depth emotion identification, expression, and regulation skills. Hence thera.pists must consider the specific techniques involved as well as the underlying principles of cognitive and emotional development (see Chapter 5), the nature of anxiety and depressive disorders, and the specific theoretical rationale for emotion identification, expression, and regulation skills (see Chapter 8 for the theoretical knowledge of  anxiety and depressive disorders). Key features of therapist competencies in emotion identification,  expression, and regulation training Training in emotion identification and expression teaches youth to understand the nature of emotions, identify signs or symptoms of specific ones, differentiate between them, and assess and rate the intensity of their own emotional experiences. Emotion regulation involves teaching youth to monitor the intensity of their emotions and subsequently engage in activities to moderate their emotions and behavior. Training methods include assessing youths’ current abilities, didactic instruction via psycho-education, discussions, role-plays, games, modeling, therapist-directed coaching activities, contingency management, and homework assignments. Emotion identification training begins during the assessment process, as youth start answering in-person interview and self-report questions regarding their pre.senting symptoms. Even at this early stage, therapists should attend to youths’ familiarity and comfort with talking about their emotions. While some youth may have insight into, and feel comfortable reporting, their emotions, most – particularly when they are  anxious or depressed – experience some difficulty discussing these symptoms. Conducting informal functional analyses can highlight whether these difficulties are due to underlying performance deficits or to skill deficits – categories that are described below. Performance deficits may include underreporting due to lack of trust or experien.tial avoidance. Intense emotional arousal can impair youth’s ability to process and express their emotions (for many youth, this arousal can be triggered by simply thinking or talking about their emotions). A therapist can identify when a performance deficit is present by looking at whether there is a discrepancy between the child’s or adolescent’s self-report (on a self-report measure) and his/her endorsement of symptoms in the clinical interview, where the youth is forthcoming on self-report measures but would underreport or become emotionally dysregu.lated. Under these circumstances, rapport building or therapist-guided distress tolerance activities may be necessary (e.g., the therapist facilitates distress tolerance by directing the youth to focus on neutral or emotion-incompatible activities). Skill deficits may include underlying cognitive or language difficulties that impair the processing and expression of one’s emotional experiences. It can be helpful to compare how well youth report on other areas of their lives in order to form a base.line of cognitive or language functioning. When available, neuropsychological evaluations should be used to inform these treatment factors as well. To assist in emotion identification training, therapists and youth should collaborate to identify which emotions the youth are already familiar with. This can be done through games or friendly competitions in which the youth are encouraged to identify as many emotions as possible in a few minutes. Therapists should then provide youth and caregivers with a rationale and background information about the nature of emotions, including the adaptive function of primary emotions (happiness, sadness, anger, fear). This helps to validate and normalize a client’s emotional experience. It can often be helpful to describe emotions as “signals” analogous to a seatbelt alarm or a low battery light on an electronic device (e.g., “low-battery light signals the need to charge batteries, fear signals a danger, anger signals that something is unfair, happiness signals a desire to do something again, and sadness signals a need for help or a loss”). Incorporating the notion of “signals” helps youth to begin developing the language needed to understand and express their emotional experiences (e.g., I am angry because it feels unfair that you are making me go to school”) (Madigan and Kurtz 2013). Once youth appear to grasp the adaptive functions of emotions, the discussion should incorporate the role of “false alarms” or maladaptive cognitions, emotions, and behaviors (the three-component-model of CBT). For example, youth could be taught to view their cognitions as triggers that send off a “false alarm” to our brains to make our bodies feel fearful physical sensations. In turn, these physical sensations can trigger us to feel alarmed and thus to avoid situations that are actually not dangerous or threatening. It is critical to teach youth the ways in which avoidance can only “re-ignite” the cycle, as the maladaptive thoughts get reinforced. Thus the “thoughts–feelings–behavior” components of CBT can be broken down for youth. It is typically helpful for the therapist to ask the child or adolescent to think of a maladaptive cognition that (s)he commonly has, and then for the therapist and client to actually draw out the three-component model by using blank circles that depict the cycle. In this way the three-component-model can be tailored to each client’s situation. Another core skill is identifying the physiological symptoms or sensations associated with specific emotions (e.g., “When I feel nervous my heart beats faster, my hands get sweaty, and I get the ‘butterflies’ in my stomach”). Developmentally appropriate explanations about the function of each symptom or sensation help to normalize clients’ physiological sensations and can begin to correct related cognitive distortions. This is particularly important for youth with panic disorder or generalized anxiety dis.order, who often experience a significant number of anxiety-related somatic symp.toms. In depression, it may be helpful to identify sensations such as feeling “heavy,” “weighed down,” “numb” or “low energy.” Using drawing or coloring activities, youth can identify which parts of their body are affected when they are feeling anxious or depressed (e.g., by using a blank outline of a person’s body, the child can then draw a butterfly in the stomach, color in the lungs and heart, and so on). Therapists must also be competent in teaching youth to differentiate between emotions. This can be done through “blending” activities in which secondary  emotions are characterized by having components of the primary emotions. Younger clients may benefit from assigning colors to represent each primary emotion (e.g., happiness, sadness, anger, and fear), then “blending” colors to form more complex colors and emotions (e.g., mixing the feelings of nervous-blue with mad-red may form the secondary emotions of irritable or annoyed-purple; mixing the primary  feelings of sad.ness and fear might form the secondary emotion of embarrassment). This scaffolding technique can also be implemented through activities such as making an “emotion soup” and a “feelings pizza” to represent and distinguish between  primary and secondary emotions that may be occurring in the present or that have occurred in the past. Emotional expression involves teaching youth to express what, why, and how intensely they are experiencing a specific emotion. To begin, therapists should teach youth to conduct behavioral chain analyses. This can be taught through interac.tive discussion, written activities, and role-play, or more concretely through interactive activities such as “matching” or making “emotion trains.” For example, therapists should encourage youth to draw connections between situations, emotions, “signals,” and behaviors (Madigan and Kurtz 2013). “Matching” activities can aid in this process by drawing two-step connections between situations and emotions to help children understand the kinds of situations that can lead to different emotions. “Detective” activities can be a fun and engaging way to begin teaching more complex behavioral chain analyses by filling in the gaps to hypothetical or client-specific exam.ples. This can be particularly helpful for youth who experience difficulty identifying early symptoms of emotions and for youth whose internalized emotions may be masked by externalized emotions (e.g., reported anger at parents for making them go to school may be masking an underlying anxiety). By playing “detective” and working backwards from behaviors that occur at the end of a chain (these are often much easier for youth to identify), youth learn to recognize the key antecedent thoughts and emotions that led to the identified behavior. This skill will help youth identify emo.tional escalations leading to episodes of emotion dysregulation; and, if they can identify and intervene on the nervous, embarrassed, or sad thoughts and feelings, secondary outbursts of anger or panic may be more easily prevented. For example, a sample conversation might look like this: THERAPIST: We don’t know what you were feeling or what happened to make you feel bad, but we do have some good evidence to use as detectives – you yelled at your parents and slammed the door. This behavior will go at the end of the train. What emotion(s) do these behaviors sound like they are coming from? YOUTH: I don’t know. THERAPIST: Do people usually slam doors when they are feeling happy, mad, or nervous? YOUTH: I don’t know, mad or nervous? THERAPIST: That sounds like a good guess to me. So, if feeling nervous signals something is dangerous and anger signals something is unfair, do you think your parents seemed dangerous or unfair in that moment? YOUTH: Unfair, they are always unfair. THERAPIST: Ok, so if something felt unfair it looks like you may have been feeling angry. This car will be anger. THERAPIST: What felt unfair to you? YOUTH: That my parents are always making me go to school which I hate because everyone laughs at me. THERAPIST: So it sounds like school can make you feel nervous and your parents want you to go anyway? [youth nods] So, the first car on the train is the thought, “It’s unfair that they are making me go someplace where I will be nervous and people will laugh at me?” YOUTH: Yeah, they make me do that stuff all the time! THERAPIST: Great detective work. So we figured out the cause of your yelling and slamming the door. The first car on the train was your thinking that your parents are being unfair for telling you to do something that makes you nervous. The second car is the emotion of anger or frustration. And the last car was yelling and slamming the door. At this point the therapist may choose to continue “playing detective” and develop another “emotion train,” sequencing the youth’s preceding feelings of anxiety and embarrassment. The two trains or chains can then be linked together to form a larger behavioral chain. In either case, the therapist can help the youth use coping strategies to intervene or “break the train.” To improve emotion expression and ultimately emotion regulation, therapists must teach youth to rate and monitor the intensity of their emotions, so they can then take action to regulate these emotions before they are overwhelmed by them. To train youth to monitor the intensity of emotions, therapists should orient them to a developmentally appropriate rating scale (e.g., 0–10 scale, feelings thermometer, emotion-faces scale, etc.). Therapists and youth should collaborate to develop situation- and symptom-specific anchors at each level on the scale. Youths’ prior behavioral and emotional difficulties should be anchored on the scale to highlight likely triggers of future emotion dysregulation. Symptom-specific anchors should also be assessed, in order to encourage youth to identify warning signs that they may become overwhelmed. Emotion regulation strategies are designed to facilitate affective control to the degree required for the person to remain in control, have the use of other coping skills (Brent and Poling 1997), and be able to encode and comprehend new material during stressful treatment activities. Many CBT interventions designed to improve youth’s overall ability to regulate their emotions and, ultimately, their symptoms of anxiety and depression require these youth to learn how to focus on, and tolerate, difficult emotions (e.g., through imaginal or situational exposure). However, it may also be necessary to teach youth to regulate their distress during acute moments of dysregula.tion, particularly early in the treatment (sometimes this is referred to as a “distress tolerance” skill) (Miller, Rathus, and Linehan 2007). These strategies are designed to divert the client’s attention away from upsetting content and feelings by refocusing it on neutral or emotion-incompatible content. Youth should be encouraged to utilize these strategies when their emotions are either too intense to manage (e.g., they become too overwhelmed to cope adaptively) or when it is more appropriate for them to focus on their current environment (e.g., listening in math class, spending time with friends, trying to fall asleep). Many youth who come for treatment have become reliant on ineffective or maladaptive strategies for the regulation of their emotions. Given this, therapist-guided distress tolerance activities may be required to facilitate youths’ emotion regulation while they learn to regulate them independently. To assist emotion regulation training, therapists must provide a rationale for why and when it may be necessary to redirect their clients’ attention to neutral or emo.tion-incompatible activities. This idea can be presented through a mental exercise analogy, where youth compare success in avoiding “thinking about a pink elephant” by “trying to stop thinking about it” with focusing on or engaging in another task. Activities designed to help youth regulate their emotions include maintaining a present focus (i.e., mindfulness) and distraction techniques (i.e., distress tolerance). These activities should be individualized to youth’s abilities and common triggers. Therapists should start by identifying adaptive coping strategies already in place (e.g., playing video games or listening to music when upset). When emotions are particu.larly intense and difficult for youth to cope with, therapists should utilize activities that are more physical (e.g., going for a walk or jog, doing pushups, taking a shower). Cognitive strategies are also important, as they are more readily generalizable to a variety of contexts. Thought interruption and positive imagery can be taught to youth who are developmentally able to identify negative thoughts and subsequently refocus their attention to positive or incompatible coping thoughts and images (see Chapter 13 for a full coverage of these cognitive strategies). Activities designed to elicit incompatible emotions are also quite useful (e.g., watching a funny movie or you tube video, listening to pleasurable music, reciting one’s favorite music lyrics or movie scenes). Present-focused thinking (also known as a “grounding technique”) involves refocusing a client’s attention to what is going on around him/her at a specific moment. Depending on youth’s comfort and stage of treatment, it may be counter-indicated to focus on certain trauma-related environmental stimuli. Cultivating present-focused thinking as a distress tolerance activity involves teaching youth to “scan their senses” (e.g., by asking themselves what they see, hear, feel, smell, and taste). As youth master present-focused thinking, therapists can begin directing them to focus on their thoughts and emotions. This will support subsequent cognitive restructuring (described in Chapter 12) and exposure tasks (described in Chapter 14) by enhancing youth’s ability to focus more effectively on their negative cognitions and emotions, respectively. Therapists should continue to utilize these strategies until youth are reliably able to identify and regulate their emotions and tolerate exposure tasks. Competence in treating anxiety disorders and depression When working with depressed youth, emotion identification strategies should be woven into mood and activity monitoring. Clients can record daily “levels” of various emotions they experience, such as anxiety or sadness, by using a “feelings thermom.eter,” which is a visual scale that depicts “amounts” of emotion on a graded scale from 0 to 8, for example, or on any other visual scale. As a homework assignment in both depression and anxiety treatments, clients are asked to record information about the daily fluctuations in their mood, as part of a weekly record of anxiety and depression. This weekly record is a chart that provides ample space for the client to specify the level of anxiety, anger, or sadness that they experienced each day of the week. Youth can then bring this mood-monitoring homework form to session, and therapists can utilize these data to gain important information on their clients’ ability to identify and monitor the levels of emotion they experience. The emotion-monitoring form can also be used as a springboard for discussion, between the client and therapist, about the former’s week, and can be utilized throughout therapy to assess whether the CBT techniques the client is learning result in an improvement of mood. Emotion identification training with depressed youth should also target somatic complaints specific to depression, which may vary considerably from those of anxiety. When treating youth with panic disorder, it will be particularly important to ensure the that the client firmly understands the adaptive function of each physiological symptom of anxiety, as cognitive distortions around these symptoms (e.g., “my heart beating faster means I’m having a heart attack”) often exacerbate and/or maintain panic-related symptoms. Youth with depression, trauma, and anxiety disorders will especially benefit from learning to track and regulate emotions, as gaining a sense of mastery over their emotions may enhance their compliance and motivation to engage in later exposure activities. Emotion regulation skills can be tailored to children with anxiety specifically by talking about how emotions such as anxiety are natural, necessary, and harmless, and are experienced by everyone, across cultures. The therapist can discuss with the client ways in which anxiety can be helpful (e.g., in athletes performing in a competition, or in getting off the road if a car is approaching). The therapist might say: “So sometimes anxiety can be good and helpful because it protects you from danger, but sometimes anxiety is not helpful – when there is no real danger.” Competence in treating both children and adolescents Teaching emotion identification, expression, and regulation to young children may require a more concrete approach than teaching these things to older children or adolescents. Young children may only be able to identify and comprehend a few basic emotional experiences (e.g., good–bad, happy, upset, scared, and the like). Therapists can help the young child find in magazines pictures of people who are experiencing certain types of emotions (e.g., happy people, sad people) in order to facilitate their acquisition of a feelings vocabulary. Therapists can also guide young children in  making feelings identification cards that show pictures of children experiencing  emotions. They can then help young children generate examples of situations where the child felt sad, angry, anxious, and so on. After young children learn to identify the basic emotions, therapists can work to teach them the concept of having control over changing one’s emotions and the notion that emotional states can change – for example, “I was sad that someone broke my art project but then I felt happy when I realized that my friend wanted to help me make another one.” In many cases, a child’s development may call for a parent-based treatment approach. That is, elements of CBT may be too complex for young children to grasp, and therefore they may need to be implemented through therapist and parent coaching and contingency management (rewards). Parent coach.ing statements and rewards will become the proxy for implementing coping strategies and exposure activities (e.g., “It’s time to use your brave thoughts to boss back anxiety and earn a reward for being brave”). Young children will likely benefit from concrete activities such as role-play, drawing, and playing games. Many of the aforementioned strategies would be too concrete or developmentally inappropriate to use with older children or adolescents. Thus older children and adolescents might appreciate the use of analogies that help them understand the basis of emotions – for example a comparison of anxiety with an overly alert “watchdog,” which is looking out for danger and whose job is to keep you safe, as described in Pincus and colleagues’ (2008) manual for panic disorder treatment for adolescents. Nevertheless, many adolescents have never developed adaptive, healthy skills for managing emotions, and this may then lead to maladaptive coping strategies such as substance use or avoidant behaviors. Thus therapists should incorporate emotion education in a developmentally appropriate way into treatments for youth of all ages. Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them Unlike many adults, youth coming for treatment are not necessarily motivated for it and may be brought in by caregivers against their will. This often creates a level of resistance that must be addressed before treatment is possible. In some cases, youth are so distressed by talking and thinking about their emotions that they become too dysregulated to engage in certain treatment activities. Emotion regulation activities may first need to be facilitated largely by the therapist and caregivers. That is, rather than asking a client to perform a certain emotion regulation skill on his/her own (e.g., by saying “This might be a good time to use some positive imagery”), the therapist or caregiver may need to create a distraction for them (e.g., begin talking about something else, go for a walk with the client, give the client something to hold in his/her hands, or pull up a funny video to watch it together with the client). Underlying skill deficits may also impede the client’s ability to comprehend or master specific emotion identification, expression, and regulation strategies (e.g., a youth with receptive or expressive language disorders will need to have information presented differently). This may require the therapist to utilize graphic organizers or prompts (e.g., keeping an index card in his/her pocket, or having the parents present coping strategies through visuals or social stories). Whenever possible and acceptable, scaffolding skills through technology – smart phones, tablets, or computers – can help provide support and prompting; thus mood-tracking applications or programs could prompt the youth to engage in mood monitoring, in thought or emotion tracking, or in certain coping strategies when needed. One common error therapists make is to teach emotion identification and expression insufficiently before they move on to other coping strategies. Some protocols call for therapists to spend one or two sessions addressing these skills. This should be done initially, or in conjunction with other coping strategies, until the client is able to accurately identify and discuss a variety of emotions, in session as well as in context (Cohen et al. 2006). Therapists must also be able to comfortably augment emotion regulation activities until youth are able to regulate their emotions indepen.dently. This requires that therapists have a firm understanding of the nature of emotions and emotion regulation and are able to pull emotion-regulation activities from their therapist “tool boxes.” Additionally, youth with intense negative emotions often exhibit frustration, anger, and disruptive behaviors as a means of avoiding aversive stimuli. When these difficulties would otherwise prohibit treatment as usual, therapists must first address the problem behaviors and the masking emotions (often anger is masking underlying anxiety and/or depression). Contingency management strategies or “behavior contracts” can be utilized in collaboration with youth and their caretakers, in order to replace the maladaptive strategies that should be avoided (say, aggression) with more adaptive strategies, which can be approached gradually (“I feel too scared to do it and need to take a break or do an easier task on the exposure hierarchy”). As this process will temporarily reinforce avoidance, it should only be used in cases where the client would other.wise avoid the situation completely, through maladaptive behaviors. It may also be necessary to utilize a response cost, where the youth receive tangible positive reinforcement for adaptive behaviors and lose privileges for operationalized maladap.tive behaviors. When working with adolescents, it can be useful to set limits by using software and thus avoid unneeded physical conflict (e.g., turn the internet off or limit smart phone features by using “parental controls” rather than physically remove the video game console from an adolescent’s bedroom). Progressive Muscle Relaxation Overview Progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) is aimed at reducing muscle tension in clients and has been used in a variety of CBT interventions for the reduction of symptoms of anxiety and/or depression. Research suggests that PMR is an effective treatment for a variety of emotional and health-related problems in both adult and younger populations (Carlson and Hoyle 1993). Among younger children, PMR is one of several effective techniques for helping them calm themselves in the moment (Lohaus and Klein-Heßling 2003). Within the context of school, group instruction of PMR has been shown to reduce the aggression levels among elementary school students who were identified as suffering from emotional or behavioral disorders (Lopata 2003). PMR has been found to help adolescents suffering from depression and other stress-related emotional problems (Reynolds and Coats 1986). In this study, a 10-session treatment protocol was successfully implemented to help moderately depressed adolescents reduce their levels of depression to nonclinical levels. PMR has been used successfully to treat symptoms of asthma among female adolescents (Nickel, Kettler et al. 2005) and levels of anger among stressed male adolescents (Nickel, Lahmann et al. 2005). It is also considered an empirically sup.ported treatment for helping children and adolescents cope with the anxiety and pain associated with painful medical procedures (Jay, Elliott, Katz, and Siegel 1987; Powers 1999). Thus PMR is very much a transdiagnostic skill, in that it has been shown to have utility in treatments that cut across various diagnostic categories. Therapists treating youth with anxiety, depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder might use PMR as one component of treatment. Key features of therapist competency in conducting  progressive muscle relaxation To conduct progressive muscle relaxation with children and adolescents, the therapist should begin by telling the client that it is important to learn the difference between the way our body feels when it is tense and when it is relaxed. Explain to the client that having tense muscles can sometimes cue our brains that there is something to be afraid or worried about. Having awareness about the level of tension in our muscles and the ability to reduce tension can present many mental health benefits and can bring about feelings of contentment and confidence. Prior to conducing PMR, it is important to assess the client’s level of relaxation on a 0–10 scale, for example (0=very tense; 10 =very relaxed) in order to be able to better assess the success of the procedure. Explain to the client that, to begin this exercise, he or she should start to breathe in and out, focusing on the breath as it hits the back of the throat. Therapists can begin by teaching the breathing re-training exercises that are covered in this chapter, to help the client begin to relax. The overall purpose of this progres.sive muscle relaxation exercise – reduction of muscle tension – should also be explained. Therapists should let the client know that they will be leading him/her through a series of exercises that they will demonstrate in front of the client. The exercises involve tensing and relaxing major muscle groups throughout the body with the aim of producing an overall state of bodily relaxation. The therapist should tailor the PMR treatment to the developmental level and age of the client (see the section on competence in treating both children and adolescents in this chapter). First, ask the client to think of a place that feels most relaxing to him/ her (common responses are “my room,” “the couch in my living room,” or “on the beach”). The therapist should use this relaxing place as a starting point for beginning PMR. Ask the client to imagine being in his/her most relaxing place as (s)he takes deep, slow breaths. Therapists can add an imagery component by suggesting that the client think of the sounds and smells (s)he is experiencing while being, in his/her mind, in that relaxing place. As the therapist evokes this imagery, the client should be breathing slowly and sitting in a comfortable position. The therapist can state: “I am going to count from 10 to 1, and each time I count a number I want you to let yourself simply take deep breaths, in and out, while allowing yourself to become more and more relaxed; and when I get to 1, I want you to imagine that you are now in the place that is most relaxing and peaceful to you.” Once the client appears to be relaxed, let him/her know that you are now ready to tense or relax muscle groups. The first muscle group to be tensed is the hands. Ask the client to make fists with each hand and to squeeze each fist tightly, as if squeezing something in his/her hand. Therapists should say out loud: “Hold the tension in your hand for the count of three … 1, 2, 3 … feel the tension in your hands … and release your fists/relax your hands.” Ask the client to notice the difference between being tense and being relaxed. The therapist should wait approximately 15 seconds, then have the client repeat that exercise (tensing the fists) using a similar procedure as in the first trial. This exercise should be repeated altogether three times; this gives the client a chance to really experience and notice how (s)he can achieve a state of relaxation in his/her hands by tensing and holding the tension in the hands for at least three seconds, and then by relaxing the hands. Therapists who are implementing PMR should then proceed through the rest of the muscle groups using a similar tensing and holding, then letting go and relaxing procedure, allowing three trials per major muscle group. After the hands, the therapist can lead the client into tensing and relaxing the shoulders (by lifting the shoulders to the ears and then down again), the face (by tensing up the whole face and then letting go of the tension), the legs (by lifting each leg up, holding the tension, then relaxing), the arms (by holding the arms in front, tensing for three seconds, then relaxing). It is not necessary for therapists to rigidly adhere to one particular order for tensing and relaxing each muscle group; however, it is important to make sure you go through each muscle group with the client. Between muscle groups, the therapist should continue to refocus the client on his/her breathing. In order to competently implement this procedure, therapists should speak in a calm, relaxing voice while they help the client learn PMR. Once the therapist has gone through all the major muscle groups with the client, (s)he should have the client try to tense his/her entire body for three seconds, then let go of the tension and relax. The client should appear to be extremely relaxed after learning this skill. To end the procedure, therapists should then let the client know that they will count from 10 to 1 and that, with each number, the client should take deep breaths and should allow him-/herself to become gradually more awake and open his/her eyes. When the client opens his/her eyes, the therapist should again assess his/her level of relaxation on a 0–10 scale (0= very tense; 10 =very relaxed). At the end of the procedure, the therapist should check in with the client about his or her reaction to conducting PMR and use the suggestions listed in the “common obstacles” section to troubleshoot any important issues. Competence in treating the anxiety disorders and depression PMR can be utilized in treatments for both anxiety and depression in children. Given that both anxiety and depression can result in the disruption of children’s healthy sleep patterns, PMR can assist both depressed and anxious clients with falling asleep at night. For children with generalized anxiety disorder or other anxiety disorders, relaxation strategies can help putting their minds and bodies at ease, to aid the process of going to sleep. For children with depression or anxiety, learning a concrete skill such as PMR can provide improved feelings of self-efficacy, increased control and awareness of one’s body, and a tool for coping with stress. It is helpful to gauge clients’ moods before and after PMR practice. Anxious clients often report that their moods improve when they become more relaxed. For clients with depression, therapists are typically trying to use behavioral activation strategies to help them become more engaged in their environment. Competence in treating both children and adolescents When one is treating young, preschool through school-aged children, it can be h elpful to utilize more imagery while teaching them to progressively tense and relax their muscle groups. For example, instead of simply asking a child to tense his/her fists, the therapist could ask the child to imagine him-/herself squeezing lemons in each fist, to make a tall glass of lemonade. This use of imagery could help young children become more engaged in PMR. Similarly, when teaching a child to tense, then relax his/her neck muscles, the therapist could have the child imagine that (s)he is a turtle who first hides in his/her shell (bringing shoulders to the ears), then sticks his/her head out of the shell (shoulders drop). Total bodily tension can be taught by  having children imagine that they are a strong tree, blowing in the wind, and in order to stay intact in the wind they have to tense up all of the branches (that is, all of their limbs) (Pincus 2012; Pincus and Otis 2001). For older children and adolescents, imagery can still be helpful; however, it should be developmentally appropriate, if they are to feel engaged in the procedure. Use of imagery that is too child-like for an adolescent could result in the adolescent being unmotivated to practice or use PMR; thus tailoring the imagery to the age and particular preferences of the client is very important. Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them Some clients might report that they have a hard time using imagery to imagine themselves in a relaxing place. For these clients, it is possible to do PMR without imagery (just lead them through progressively tensing and relaxing their muscles without creating a relaxing scene that they are imagining). Other clients might benefit from the therapist creating the imagery for them (e.g., “Feel the breeze on your face as you sit on the beach … feel the sand through your fingertips”). Some clients might report that they are being distracted from implementing PMR by maladaptive thoughts that are entering their mind. It is important to teach these clients not to judge themselves for having the thoughts, but to treat the thoughts like passing clouds – to notice them, without necessarily trying to change them. Instead, suggest that the client continually try to refocus his/her energy and attention on the muscle group that is being tensed and relaxed. As PMR is a skill that requires practice, it is also possible that some children will report that they were too busy during the week to make time to practice their PMR. In these cases, it can be helpful to teach the PMR skill also to the parents and to suggest that the entire family create a time to conduct PMR together. It is helpful if a therapist can give the client a PMR script to practice with between therapy sessions. Some therapists might audio record their session, while the client is using a digital audio recorder. This recording can then be given to the client to listen to during the week. Other therapists have also relied upon previously published recordings of PMR for children that include imagery (Pincus and Otis 2001). If the therapist has provided for the client a pre-recorded session of PMR, the entire family can listen to it and practice together. It can be helpful if the ther.apist helps the child brainstorm barriers to practice, and also possible solutions. It is important that therapists  emphasize how learning the skill of relaxation is like riding a bicycle: once the skill is mastered, it can be used with ease at many differ.ent moments in the child’s life – before a test, to help with falling asleep, before a race, and so on. Some clients might report feeling sore after implementing the procedure. Be sure the client is only repeating each muscle group three times and is tensing the muscle group for only three seconds. Therapists need to be sure that clients are not implementing the procedure incorrectly. If clients have a preexisting medical condition or an injury that prevents them from tensing and relaxing certain muscle groups, it is important to refrain from tensing this muscle group until the injury has healed. Applied Tension Overview Applied tension (AT) is a technique that is utilized to prevent vasovagal syncope – that is, a sudden drop in blood pressure that leads to fainting – in individuals who partici.pate in CBT targeting specific phobia, blood–injection–injury (BII) subtype (see, e.g., Öst and Ollendick 2001). While fainting is not typically associated with the body’s physiological response to anxiety, it is estimated that up to 75 percent of the individuals diagnosed with BII phobia have a history of fainting at the sight of blood, needles, and/or during injections (Öst 1992). Due to the association between BII phobia and vasovagal syncope, applied tension is designed to counteract the vasovagal response that causes one to faint; and it does so by increasing blood pressure during exposure to phobic stimuli (Foulds, Wiedmann, Patterson, and Brooks 1990). Through this action, the AT technique allows clients to gain control over their physiological response, feel more confident in the presence of blood and needles, and successfully complete in vivo exposures. AT has demonstrated efficacy at reducing or preventing the vasovagal response during the treatment of BII phobia in numerous studies with adult populations, and more recently with youth (Hellström, Fellenius, and Öst 1996; Mednick and Claar 2012). While this technique requires some practice if it is to be used independently, it can be implemented and mastered by clients in a relatively short period of time and has been successfully employed in single-session treatments for specific phobias (Öst, Svensson, Hellström, and Lindwall 2001). Key features of therapist competency in conducting applied tension Therapists who wish to use AT with young clients should be familiar with its rationale, be able to explain and model its use in the treatment session, and be adept at helping clients understand when and how to use AT in the course of in vivo exposures. Prior to training in AT techniques children or adolescents who faint frequently, it may be necessary for therapists to consult their client’s pediatrician to determine if any med.ical conditions exist which may preclude the use of this method. Next, therapists should provide the client with a clear, developmentally appropriate physiological explanation of the vasovagal response that causes fainting. For example, they can explain that fainting is caused by a sudden drop in blood pressure and a subsequent decrease in the amount of blood available to the brain. Typically, when people faint, they fall to the floor, which helps their body regain blood pressure and sends blood back to the brain, so that they “wake up” and continue functioning. It can be explained that several situations or objects can trigger fainting and that seeing blood and getting an injection are a few of those triggers. Children and adolescents should be reassured that there is nothing truly harmful or life-threatening about fainting itself, but that it can be dangerous to fall as a result of fainting. Additionally, it should be observed that simply having had a prior experience of fainting in the presence of blood or needles may strengthen or at least maintain clients’ fear and avoidance behaviors related to these situations. Therapists can explain that, because these individuals faint when they “can’t handle” the blood-related stimulus, they never allow themselves to habituate to the situation and learn that nothing truly terrifying happens as a result of seeing blood or receiving an injection. Prior to teaching the technique, therapists should also discuss the various symptoms that can be precursors to a fainting episode: lightheadedness, nausea, increased perspi.ration, blurry vision, and changes in hearing. These are especially important to assess and discuss in detail, because increasing clients’ awareness of the particular symptoms they experience before fainting will eventually cue them to use applied tension to prevent this response. Once their client has a firm grasp of the rationale behind AT, therapists should begin didactic instruction. First, they may model the procedure for the client to observe. In order to do so, therapists can sit in a chair facing their client and begin by tensing their arm muscles. This can be done by making fists and squeezing them tightly, while also contracting the biceps and forearm muscles. In order to simplify the procedure for young clients, it may be necessary to introduce each muscle group separately. Once therapists have modeled applying tension to the arm muscles, they can practice along with clients in 15–20-second trials, taking short breaks of 20–30 seconds between each trial. Clients should be told that, during each trial, they should continue applying tension until they feel a sensation of warmth in their head or face. During breaks, clients should be taught simply to discontinue applying tension rather than to relax their muscles. Once clients have successfully learned the procedure with their arm muscles, therapists can guide them through applying tension to the trunk and leg muscles in much the same way. Therapists should make sure to monitor their clients’ breathing during applied tension and, if necessary, to remind their clients to breathe at a normal pace. It is not uncommon for youth to hold their breath when they first learn AT methods. Because children and adolescents who learn AT are likely to eventually utilize this procedure while having their blood drawn or receiving an injection, it is important to teach children how to keep one arm relaxed while simultaneously tensing the other muscle groups. This can be difficult at first and will likely require practice to master. Initially it may be helpful to allow the child to move one arm while tensing the other muscles in the body, and then to gradually reduce movement in the arm until it hangs loose. It may also help to ask children to imagine one arm being made of “jello” while the rest of the body is made of steel. Following demonstration and joint practice of the procedure, therapists should assign regular practice as homework. It is also typically necessary for therapists to demonstrate applied tension to their clients’ parents, so that the latter may be able to monitor practice at home. Parents should be warned that sometimes children may develop a headache after practice; if this should occur, it can be prevented in the future by reducing the number of trials or by applying a lighter degree of tension. Before beginning in vivo exposures, therapists should review the applied tension techniques and remind their clients to begin using this method immediately upon the onset of pre-vasovagal sensations such as dizziness, lightheadedness, or changes in vision or hearing. Because therapists begin with exposures that are less likely to cause a vasovagal reaction, clients will have ample opportunities to practice AT before approaching situations that are more likely to result in fainting. During exposures, therapists should remain aware of clients’ breathing and may need to remind them to breathe normally. Especially during early exposures, therapists can help by coaching children through the AT procedure, prompting them to take breaks between each trial and to begin applying tension once again after each break. As youth are increasingly successful at employing AT and gain momentum with this practice, therapists can gradually let their input and coaching fade away, allowing youth more independence as they confront their fears. Competence in treating anxiety disorders and depression AT is unique in that it is specifically designed to treat BII phobia, and therefore would not be routinely used to treat any other anxiety or mood disorder. Competence in treating both children and adolescents Because most of the research support for using AT has been demonstrated with adults and adolescents, evidence in the literature for its efficacy with very young children is lacking. This is not to say that the technique is necessarily counter-indicated with younger children. Rather, therapists should carefully consider the clinical, medical, and developmental implications before using it. Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them Youth often exhibit resistance to implementing these strategies during in vivo exposures, due to excessive fear of fainting. Because of this, it may be necessary to spend extra time engaging in cognitive restructuring and emotion regulation  strategies. Since there is a small chance that youth may in fact faint, cognitive restructuring should spe.cifically target catastrophic thoughts about “how bad” it would really be, what would happen if fainting did occur, and how the client would cope with it effectively even if fainting did happen (see Chapter 12 for more details on cognitive restructuring). Breathing Re-training Key features of therapist competencies in implementing  breathing re-training Breathing re-training is aimed at countering anxiety-related hyperventilation or overbreathing, which some individuals with panic disorder experience. Breathing re- training is commonly implemented within CBT for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia; but it can also be used in treatments for other internalizing disorders, when shallow or quick breathing causes panic-like symptoms. It has also been utilized to help youth cope with the anxiety and pain associated with stressful medical procedures. The primary task of the therapist who implements breathing re-training is to help the client learn how to slow down and deepen his/her breathing so as to moderate the amount of oxygen inhaled (Pincus et al. 2008). As a first step, before beginning to teach a client to conduct breathing re-training, it is helpful to demonstrate how physiological sensations can impact anxiety levels. This can be accomplished by explaining the fact that panic attacks are the result of the occurrence of both physical sensations and fear of these sensations, and that this co-occurrence can operate in a vicious cycle, whereby the fear of the sensations can actually increase their intensity. It is also important to review with the client the various triggers that may prompt panic sensations. One such trigger might be a maladaptive thought such as: “If my heart races while I’m in school, I won’t be able to handle it”; another trigger might be a behavior, for instance avoidance of feared situations; and the third possible trigger is a physical sensation (e.g., being warm), which can also trigger panic-like sensations. After describing the link between physical sensations and anxiety, as well as the  triggers that can lead to those physical sensations, the therapist ought to describe and model for the child or adolescent how these physical sensations occur. In this manner, the therapist would explain how overbreathing (taking rapid, short breaths and exhaling very hard, at about three times the normal rate) causes one’s body to get rid of more carbon dioxide than usual – which, although not dangerous, can produce disturbing physical sensations. The therapist can model this by having the client stand up and instructing him/her to conduct an overbreathing exercise along with the  therapist: both would take rapid short breaths together and would exhale very hard and quickly. After the client finishes, have the client describe what types of physical sensations he/she is having. It is important to point out that there are similarities in physical sensations between exercises such as this one (which lowers carbon dioxide levels) and symptoms experienced during panic. Before teaching a client a new way to breathe, it is important to set the client up with a good rationale for learning this skill. One possible way this might be done is as follows: People with anxiety problems often overbreathe, or take rapid, short breaths, without being aware of doing so. Breathing is normally under the body’s automatic control, but we can actually exert voluntary control over our breathing, as we do when we swim. Emotions can also affect our breathing rate. Can you think of an emotion you could experience that might cause you to breathe more rapidly? Since we know that overbreathing can trigger subtle changes in our carbon dioxide levels and that these changes can trigger panic-like sensations, I would like to teach you a way to become more aware of your breathing – and then to change your breathing patterns. When you overbreathe, you can actually see that you are using your chest muscles instead of your abdominal muscles. [Therapist should role-play overbreathing and should have the client watch to see what part of the therapist’s body is moving rapidly (the chest).] Sometimes chest breathing can cause your chest to feel tight, or can cause chest pain or tense muscles. Sometimes chest breathing can even trigger panic-like feelings. So it is important to learn to change your breathing pattern so that you can diminish the chances that these sensations trigger panic. As with any specific CBT technique, once the client understands the rationale for learning breathing re-training, (s)he will be much more likely to be motivated to learn and utilize this skill. To teach breathing re-training to a client, it is important to break it down into two major skills. The first skill is the breathing component, which is comprised of two parts: (i) learning to monitor and change the way one breathes (switching from chest breathing to abdominal breathing) without trying to change the rate of breathing; and (ii) learning to change the rate of one’s breathing (slowing breathing down). Once the client masters these parts, (s)he can then learn the next major skill, which is the meditational component. In this component clients learn to focus their attention on breathing and to slow down their thoughts. Therapists need to be able to model appropriate diaphragmatic breathing. They should do this by having the client watch and imitate as the therapist places one hand on his/her chest and the other on his/her stomach, just above the navel. The therapist should show the client that his/her stomach – not chest – should be moving up and down as (s)he breathes in and out. It is very helpful if therapists give the client some basic instructions for implementing breathing re-training. They should instruct the client to relax for a few seconds prior to beginning, while breathing at the normal rate. Then they should instruct the client to place one hand on the chest, the other on the diaphragm. Each time the client breathes in, (s)he should count, either out loud or in the mind, beginning with “1”; and each time the client exhales, (s)he should think or say “relax.” Clients should continue doing this until they reach a count of 10, and then they should start again from “1,” practicing for approximately 10 minutes. Therapists can demonstrate all this using the words “one (breathe in), relax (breathe out).” Clients should be encouraged to practice this skill as homework, every day. Once the client has mastered diaphragmatic breathing, the therapist can teach him/ her how to slow the rate of his/her breathing. This should be done by explaining that changing the rate of counting will assist the client to slow his/her breathing rate. Therapists should then demonstrate this process and how counting at gradually slower rates during diaphragmatic breathing can help slow down their breathing. The client should then practice this exercise for at least a few minutes, in the therapist’s presence. Therapists should provide guidance and correction if the client is not implementing the skill correctly. They should point out that the goal is to slow the rate of breathing gradually, so as to reach an average rate of 8–10 breaths per minute (i.e., approxi.mately three seconds per inhaling, three seconds per exhaling). Throughout these breathing exercises therapists should encourage clients to focus only on their breathing. They should also remind clients that the skill of breathing re-training is like riding a bicycle: it becomes habitual with practice. The meditational component of breathing re-training can be helpful in assisting clients to focus more deeply on their breathing, without being distracted by passing thoughts. Clients should be taught how to gently notice thoughts as they pass through their minds, but to refocus attention on their breathing. Initially it is important for clients to practice in quiet, distraction-free, peaceful spaces that are conducive to relaxation. Therapists should remind clients that, once they master the skill of breathing re-training, they can conduct this exercise in more challenging surroundings (while watching televi.sion, standing in line, in class, in the supermarket, etc.). When the client has had an opportunity to practice breathing re-training as home.work, therapists should check in with him/her to find out whether any difficulties arose during practice and, if they did, to help troubleshoot them (see the section on common obstacles to competent practice in this chapter, and also Chapter 11, which deals specifically with homework-related competencies). Competence in treating the anxiety disorders and depression Learning how to become aware of one’s breathing, how to slow it, and how to use meditational strategies can be very helpful not only for clients with panic disorder, but also for clients with other anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder, or for clients with other internalizing disorders, such as depression. Learning to conduct breathing re-training is not difficult and clients can develop feelings of self-efficacy as they begin to practice and master this skill. Clients who have depression may feel irritable or sad, or may have low energy levels. Learning the skill of meditation can be helpful for children or adolescents who are depressed. However, these clients may find it more difficult to concentrate on breathing, or to manage maladaptive thoughts that make focusing on breathing hard. Such clients might benefit from monitoring their mood both before and after the breathing re-training practice, to see whether they notice any improvements in their mood after taking time to focus on the skill. Parents of children who are depressed might also be taught the skill, as breathing re-training often results in feelings of relaxation and well-being. Competence in treating both children and adolescents The skill of breathing re-training can be taught to children, adolescents, and adults. The meditational component, however, can be more difficult to teach to a very young child, who may not yet grasp the concept of “noticing thoughts in one’s mind.” With young children, it can be helpful if therapists teach the diaphragmatic breathing skill first to the child, and then also to the parent. Children might enjoy practicing the skill with their parents, and therapists should suggest this as an option for practice. Adolescents, on the other hand, are often able to learn all of the com.ponents of breathing re-training – diaphragmatic breathing, slowing breathing, and the meditational component. Adolescents might prefer to have more independence in their practice schedule at home. Therapists can also ask adolescents whether they prefer to teach their own parents, during the session, how to conduct breathing re.training (which should give the therapist an opportunity to see how well the client has digested the material), or whether they would rather have the therapist teach the parents this skill. In some cases, especially with older adolescents, it may be most appropriate to teach the adolescent the skill alone in session. Given that breathing re-training is such a concrete skill, it is often one that children report they enjoy learning, and they notice when they can implement the skill with more ease. Common obstacles to competent practice and methods to overcome them Therapists should be prepared that some clients will have trouble implementing and learning this skill, or practicing it on their own. If a client has trouble implementing breathing re-training, have him/her imagine that his/her lungs are like balloons, and that, as (s)he breathes in, the balloon inflates. You can also have the client push out his/her stomach before taking a breath, or placing a light book on his/her stomach, so as to be able to visualize the book going up and down as (s)he breathes. Another technique is to have the client lie on his/her stomach, head resting on his/her arms. All of these techniques make it more difficult for chest breathing to take place. At times, therapists may have to respond to clients who complain that they have difficulty thinking exclusively about their breathing when they conduct the breathing re-training exercise. In such cases it is important for therapists to encourage clients not to get angry or upset with themselves, but rather to notice these thoughts and gently refocus their attention back to the exercise. Therapists should encourage cli.ents to continue to practice the skill of breathing re-training, and their ability to focus attention should improve considerably. Therapists ought to have a number of techniques they can suggest if the client is having difficulties with diaphragmatic breathing. They could refer the client back to the importance of learning about one’s breathing patterns and changing them, if that client is particularly resistant to learning the skill. The therapist could also help clients who have trouble slowing down their breathing by suggesting that they do it more gradually (e.g., by counting at a gradually slower rate). It is also very possible that therapists will hear from clients who describe having difficulties with the meditational component of breathing re-training. They could advise that these clients practice breathing re-training first thing in the morning, while they are still sleepy, or that they lower the lights in the room while they practice, or that they practice with soft, relaxing music in the background. Therapists can also encourage clients to practice throughout the day and to begin to notice when they might be naturally starting to do more diaphragmatic breathing. Conclusion Learning skills for managing maladaptive mood and arousal are critical for children’s healthy development and protect against the development of psychopathology. All of the skills reviewed in this chapter can be useful for therapists to utilize with youth who expe.rience difficulties in managing negative emotions that are often part of everyday life; but they might be especially hard for youth with anxiety or depression to manage effectively. Each of the skills reviewed in this chapter can be adapted for use with both young and older children and adolescents, and we have illustrated this throughout. In addition, we have provided information about how each skill could be applied to  clients with anxiety or depression. Through clinical experience and practice, beginning therapists will develop the necessary key competencies for implementing emotion identification, regulation, and management skills, applied tension, breathing re-training, and progressive muscle relaxation with clients and for tailoring these skills to the needs of each client. By receiving training in these techniques, therapists will be well equipped to teach these skills to the children, adolescents, and families who can benefit most from them. References Brent, David, and Kimberly Poling. 1997. Cognitive Therapy Treatment Manual for Depressed and Suicidal Youth. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh, Services for Teens at Risk. Carlson, Charles R., and Rick H. Hoyle. 1993. “Efficacy of Abbreviated Progressive Muscle Relaxation Training: A Quantitative Review of Behavioral Medicine Research.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61: 1059–67. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.61.6.1059 Ciccetti, Dante, Brian P. Ackerman, and Carroll E. Izard. 1995. “Emotions and Emotion Reg.ulation in Developmental Psychopathology.” Development and Psychopathology, 7: 1–10. Cohen, Judith A., Anthony P. Mannarino, and Esther Deblinger. 2006. Treating Trauma and Traumatic Grief in Children and Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Compas, Bruce E. 1987. “Stress and Life Events during Childhood and Adolescence.” Clinical Psychology Review, 7: 275–302. Curry, John F., Karen C. Wells, David A. Brent, Gregory N. Clarke, Paul Rohde, Anne Marie Albano, … John S. March. 2005. Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Cognitive Behavior Therapy Manual: Introduction, Rationale, and Adolescent Sessions. Durham, NC: Duke University Medical Center, The TADS Team. Eisenberg, Nancy, Richard A. Fabes, and Ivana K. Guthrie. 1997. “Coping with Stress: The Roles of Regulation and Development.” In Sharlene A. Wolchik and Irwin N. Sandler (Eds.), Handbook of Children’s Coping: Linking Theory and Intervention (pp. 41–70). New York: Plenum Press. Foulds, Jonathan, Klaus Wiedmann, James Patterson, and Neil Brooks. 1990. “The Effects of Muscle Tension on Cerebral Circulation in Blood-Phobic and Non-Phobic Subjects.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28: 481–6. Hellström, Kirstin, Jan Fellenius, and Lars G. Öst. 1996. “One versus Five Sessions of Applied Tension in the Treatment of Blood Phobia.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34: 101–12. DOI: 10.1016/0005-7967(95)00060-7 Jay, Susan M., Charles H. Elliott, Ernest Katz, and S. Stuart E. Siegel. 1987. “Cognitive– Behavioral and Pharmacologic Interventions for Children’s Distress during Painful Medical Procedures.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 5: 860–5. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.55.6.860 Kendall, Philip C., and Kristen A. Hedke. 2006. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Anxious Chil.dren: Therapist Manual (3rd ed.). Ardmore, PA: Workbook Publishing. Lewinsohn, Peter M., Greg N. Clarke, Hyman Hops, and Judy Andrews. 1990. Cognitive– behavioral treatment for depressed adolescents. Behavior Therapy, 21(4): 385–401. DOI: 10.1016/S0005-7894(05)80353-3 Lohaus, Arnold, and Johannes Klein-Hessling. 2003. “Relaxation in Children: Effects of Extended and Intensified Training.” Psychology & Health, 18: 237–49. DOI: 10.1080/0887044021000057257 Lopata, Christopher. 2003. “Progressive Muscle Relaxation and Aggression among Elementary Students with Emotional or Behavioral Disorders.” Behavioral Disorders, 28: 162–72. Madigan, Ryan J., and Steven M. S. Kurtz. 2013. Teacher–Child Interaction Training: A Modular Approach to Emotion Regulation. Unpublished manuscript. Mednick, Lauren M., and Robyn L. Claar. 2012. “Treatment of Severe Blood-Injection-Injury Phobia with the Applied-Tension Method: Two Adolescent Case Examples.” Clinical Case Studies, 11: 24–34. DOI: 10.1177/1534650112437405 Miller, Alec L., Jill H. Rathus, and Marsha Linehan. 2007. Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Suicidal Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Nickel, Cerstin, Christian Kettler, Moritz Muehlbacher, Claaas Lahmann, Karin Tritt, Rainhold Fartacek, and Marius K. Nickel. 2005. “Effect of Progressive Muscle Relaxation in Adolescent Female Bronchial Asthma Patients: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Controlled Study. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 59: 393–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2005.04.008 Nickel, Cerstin, Claas Lahmann, Karin Tritt, Thomas H. Loew, Wolfhardt K. Rother, and Marius K. Nickel. 2005. “Short Communication: Stressed Aggressive Adolescents Benefit from Progressive Muscle Relaxation: A Random, Prospective, Controlled Trial.” Stress and Health: Journal of the International Society for the Investigation of Stress, 26: 169–75. DOI: 10.1002/smi.1050 Öst, Lars G. 1992. “Blood and Injection Phobia: Background and Cognitive, Physiological, and Behavioral Variables.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101: 68. DOI: 10.1037/0021-843X.101.1.68 Öst, Lars G., and Thomas H. Ollendick. 2001. Manual for One-Session Treatment of Specific Phobias. Unpublished manuscript. Öst, Lars G., Lisa Svensson, Kerstin Hellström, and Robert Lindwall. 2001. “One-Session Treatment of Specific Phobias in Youths: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69: 814. DOI: 10.1037//0022-006X.69.5.814 Ollendick, Thomas and Neville King. 2004. “Empirically Supported Treatments for Children and Adolescents: Advances towards Evidence-Based Practice.” In Paula M. Barrett and Thomas H. Ollendick (Eds.), Handbook of Interventions that Work with Children and Ado.lescents: Prevention and Treatment (pp. 3–26). West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons. Pincus, Donna B. 2012. Growing Up Brave: Expert Strategies for Helping Your Child Overcome Fear, Stress and Anxiety. New York: Little, Brown. Pincus, Donna B., and J. D. Otis. 2001. I Can Relax: A Relaxation CD for Children (Audio compact disc). Boston, MA: Psychzone. Pincus, Donna B., Jill T. Ehrenreich, and Sara G. Mattis. 2008. Mastery of Anxiety and Panic for Adolescents: Therapist Guide. New York: Oxford University Press. Powers, Scott W. 1999. “Empirically Supported Treatments in Pediatric Psychology: Procedure-Related Pain.” Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 24: 131–45. DOI: 10.1093/ jpepsy/24.2.131 Rapee, Ronald M., Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, Viviana Wuthrich, Maree Abbott, Jennifer Hudson, and Ann Wignall. 2006. The Cool Kids Child and Adolescent Anxiety Program Therapist Manual. Sydney: Centre for Emotional Health, Macquarie University. Reynolds, William M., and Kevin I. Coats. 1986. “A Comparison of Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy and Relaxation Training for the Treatment of Depression in Adolescents.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54: 653–60. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.54.5.653 Sburlati, Elizabeth S., Carolyn A. Schniering, Heidi J. Lyneham, and Ronald M. Rapee. 2011. “A Model of Therapist Competencies for the Empirically Supported Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Child and Adolescent Anxiety and Depressive Disorders.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14, 89–109. Suveg, Cynthia, and Janice Zeman. 2004. “Emotion Regulation in Children with Anxiety Disorders.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33: 750–9. Further Reading Francis, Sarah E., Peter G. Mezo, and Stephanie L. Fung. 2012. “Self-Control Training in Children: A Review of Interventions for Anxiety and Depression and the Role of Parental Involvement.” Psychotherapy Research, 22: 220–38. DOI: 10.1080/10503307.2011.637990 Gilroy, Lisa J., Kenneth C. Kirkby, Brett A. Daniels, Ross G. Menzies, and Iain M. Montgom.ery. 2003. “Long-Term Follow-Up of Computer-Aided Vicarious Exposure versus Live Graded Exposure in the Treatment of Spider Phobia.” Behavior Therapy, 34: 65–76. DOI: 10.1016/S0005-7894(03)80022-9 Klein-Heßling, Johannes, and Arnold Lohaus. 2002. “Benefits and Interindividual Differences in Children’s Responses to Extended and Intensified Relaxation Training.” Anxiety, Stress and Coping: An International Journal, 15: 275–88. DOI: 10.1080/1061580021000020734 Lohaus, Arnold, Johannes Klein-Heßling, Claus Vögele, and Christiane Kuhn-Hennighausen. 2001. “Psychophysiological Effects of Relaxation Training in Children.” British Journal of Health Psychology, 6: 197–206. DOI: 10.1348/135910701169151 Rausch, Sarah M., Sandra E. Gramling, and Stephen M. Auerbach. 2006. “Effects of a Single Session of Large-Group Meditation and Progressive Muscle Relaxation Training on Stress Reduction, Reactivity, and Recovery.” International Journal of Stress Management, 13: 273–90. DOI: 10.1037/1072-5245.13.3.273 Shapiro, Jennifer R., Emily M. Pisetsky, Wen Crenshaw, Shanna Spainhour, Robert M. Hamer, Maureen Dymek-Valentine, and Cynthia M. Bulik. 2008. “Exploratory Study to Decrease Postprandial Anxiety: Just Relax!” International Journal of Eating Disorders, 41: 728–33. DOI: 10.1002/eat.20552 Taylor, Daniel J., and Brandy M. Roane. 2010. “Treatment of Insomnia in Adults and  Children: A Practice-Friendly Review of Research.” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66, 1137–47. DOI: 10.1002/jclp.20733 