14 Changing Maladaptive Behaviors, Part 1 Exposure and Response Prevention Brennan J. Young, Thomas H. Ollendick, and Stephen P. Whiteside Introduction Working with anxious children through exposure therapy is at once inherently chal.lenging and rewarding. Children by nature desire to learn, grow, and gain mastery over their world; but children with anxiety must work harder to approach and effec.tively interact with their world. For those of us who are called upon to help anxious children, our reward is to see them push through the fear to grow in both confidence and competence; our challenge is to enable them to do so. Just as it is inherently difficult for a child to face his fears, it can be difficult for clinicians to effectively implement exposure therapy with children, and many clini.cians choose not to adopt this approach (Addis and Krasnow 2000; Valderhaug, Gotestam, and Larsson 2004). For some, exposure does not fit their theoretical orientation or therapeutic style. Others may be reluctant to deliberately induce additional distress in children who are already fearful. Nevertheless, exposure therapy in anxiety has garnered both theoretical and empirical support. Avoidance of fearful stimuli is regarded as a core feature in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety disor.ders. According to Lang’s (1967) tripartite model, behavioral avoidance serves to negatively reinforce the anxiety response. Exposure, on the other hand, is incompat.ible with avoidance and, when performed competently and effectively, results in the extinction of the anxiety response through habituation. Indeed, empirical data support the efficacy of exposure in reducing fear and anxiety (see In-Albon and Schneider 2007; Kendall et al. 2005; Seligman and Ollendick 2011). For these reasons, exposure is considered the treatment of choice for childhood anxiety. Our goal in the current chapter is to lay a clear road map for clinicians training to acquire competence in exposure therapy with children and adolescents. We begin by Evidence-Based CBT for Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents: A Competencies-Based Approach, First Edition. Edited by Elizabeth S. Sburlati, Heidi J. Lyneham, Carolyn A. Schniering, and Ronald M. Rapee.  © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. describing an evidence-based approach to conducting exposure therapy, highlighting key factors for successful implementation as well as key areas of competence for the successful clinician. We then discuss variations on this theme, describing the application of these central principles to treating specific types of anxiety. Next, we examine some developmental considerations that arise in work with children and adolescents and can further complicate the design and delivery of exposure therapy. Finally, we identify and suggest ways to overcome obstacles commonly encountered while delivering exposure therapy to children and adolescents. Key Features of the Competencies: Behavioral Markers of Competently Delivering Exposure Therapy Successfully delivering exposure therapy requires competence in several specific areas. Each area of competence will be discussed, but we begin with a general overview of the principal elements of exposure therapy. First, providing a strong rationale for engaging in exposure builds motivation for therapy, orients the child and her parent to their active role in therapy, and promotes tolerance for the distress that inevitably accompanies exposure. Next, the clinician conducts a functional analysis of the child’s anxiety, paying careful attention to the ways in which the child actively avoids facing her fears. The goal of this analysis is to build a graded fear hierarchy that specifies the steps by which the child will begin facing her fears. The clinician then guides the child through the appropriate form of exposure (e.g., in vivo, imaginal, narrative – see below), targeting her specific fears. In doing so, the clinician ensures that the child perseveres with each exposure until her subjective distress has decreased. During each exposure, the clinician is watchful for any safety behaviors the child engages in to avoid the situation or otherwise reduce her fear without directly facing it. The suc.cessful exposure session is then rewarded so as to reinforce the child’s new behavior, and the clinician ensures that the child learns the necessary lessons (e.g., the feared consequences do not occur; the distress can be tolerated). Finally, exposures within a particular step are repeated until the task no longer elicits significant fear or avoidance; when this is achieved, the child is ready to progress to the next step on her fear hier.archy. Ultimately, exposure therapy can be considered successful when an unplanned confrontation with the feared stimulus no longer produces a heightened anxiety response or significant behavioral avoidance. Functional analysis Each child will display a unique set of fears as well as unique behavioral reactions when confronted with his fears. Thus an idiographic (versus a nomothetic) approach should be taken to designing the exposure plan, and the careful diagnosis and detailed con.ceptualization of the child’s fear and behavioral avoidance should be considered an important area of clinical competence. A thorough functional analysis of the child’s fear will include a description of the context in which fear and anxiety are triggered. It is also important to build as good an understanding as possible of what the child anticipates will happen in these situations. Finally, it is important to identify current strategies the child employs to reduce his fear. These strategies may be ways in which he is able to avoid the situation altogether, to escape from the situation when it occurs, or to seek reassurance. It may also be necessary to elicit from parents their own reactions to the situation and to the child’s fears, looking for ways in which parents themselves reinforce the child’s anxious responses and avoidance. It is important that the functional analysis of the child’s fear be as detailed and specific as possible. In fact a clinician may think of this assessment as “drilling down” or “peeling the layers of an onion” to find a core, underlying fear that lays at the heart of many of the child’s fears and avoidant behaviors (Beidel and Turner 2007). For example, consider the case of a 12-year-old boy who presented himself to an outpatient clinic with symptoms of social anxiety. This child became very anxious when interacting with strangers outside the home. Behaviorally, he withdrew from social interaction by hiding behind his parent, often had difficulty in making eye contact, and spoke in a whisper that was very difficult for others to hear. After the interview, the child and his parents were both in agreement about the range of situations that presented difficulties for the child, as well as about his behavioral reactions to those situations. The clinician continued to seek more information, asking why these situations were difficult for the child, what reactions the child feared he would receive from others, or what may happen as a result of interacting with others. The clinician also followed the matter up with questions such as: “And if that were to happen, what would be difficult about it?” Thus it is important to identify not only the negative outcome initially expected, but also the expected consequences of that outcome. Over the course of interviewing and working with this child and his parent, it became clear that the child feared that he would say something incorrect or would make a mis.take in front of a stranger, who would then form the impression that the boy was “dumb.” Understanding this core feature of the boy’s anxiety led to exposures in which he deliberately began making incorrect statements and other mistakes while interacting with strangers. Once his anxiety about making mistakes began to dissipate, his anxiety and behavioral avoidance began to improve across a variety of social situations that were not specifically targeted through exposure. Thus, when a specific fear can be identified through functional analysis, exposures can more directly target the child’s fear, and therapy can move more quickly and effectively. Often the process of getting to know a child’s anxiety continues to unfold over the course of treatment and, as the child’s trust in the clinician develops and rapport continues to be built, the child’s own insight and ability to identify thoughts and fears start to improve. Fear hierarchy Functional analysis will lead naturally to the next step in the therapy, which is to create the fear hierarchy – another area in which clinicians new to exposure therapy will need to achieve competence. The fear hierarchy delineates a series of exposures that target a specific type of anxiety or fear and progressively move the child closer to confronting his core fear; in the previous example, a hierarchy would have been created targeting the child’s fear of making mistakes in front of strangers. The clinician works with the child and his parent to identify a range of specific activities that center upon the identified fear and produce varying levels of anxiety or avoidance in the child. The child and his parent then provide a subjective rating of the level of the child’s anxiety for each activity (typically such a rating ranges from 0 to 10 and is referred to as the Subjective Units of Distress Scale – SUDS). Once each activity has been assigned a SUDS rating, the situations are in effect ordered from the least to the most distressing or impairing. Each step along the hierarchy progressively activates greater anxiety or fear in the child, since, with each exposure, he confronts his core fear more directly. It is important to bear in mind that the child’s level of distress for the later steps in the hierarchy may actually diminish as a result of his having progressed through the earlier steps. Thus a fear that originally was assigned a SUDS rating of “8” may actually be lower and more manageable by the time the child is ready to begin work on that step of the hierarchy. A well-crafted hierarchy will include items that are easy enough for the child to engage with immediately; items that are more challenging than those encountered in a typical daily experience; and enough intermediate steps for the child to move from the former to the latter gradually. Taking good care to identify steps that produce lower levels of anxiety is very important for engaging the child and for starting to build confidence. By the same token, each step in the hierarchy should not be too far above the previous step in terms of the child’s anxiety. Finally, the last steps may include very challenging exposures, which directly target the child’s core fear and serve to dramatically disconfirm the consequences feared by the child. An example of this would be asking a child who is afraid of germs and contamination to put her hand in a toilet bowl – in the child’s mind possibly the dirtiest and most germ-laden place imaginable. This overlearning may enhance symptom improvement and maintain treatment gains. Having stated the importance of a well-developed hierarchy, it is also true that the process of getting to know a child’s anxiety continues to unfold over the course of treatment, as rapport and trust continue to grow and the child’s own insight and ability to identify thoughts and fears begin to improve. Thus the initial fear hierarchy is also a work in progress, and, in training new clinicians, it will be important to encourage flexibility when they plan and deliver exposures. In addition, many anxious children show multiple fears, which often encompass several domains and thereby necessitate several fear hierarchies (Kendall, Brady, and Verduin 2001). Beginning with exposures that are easily controlled by the clinician and that present a high likelihood of success for the child will help build confidence and motivation early on in therapy. The clinician should also consider beginning with fears that, once reduced, can liberate the greatest potential for regaining daily functioning. Clinicians are encouraged to focus on one set of fears at a time, so that the child can achieve success in an identified area. However, due to practical constraints on conducting exposures, a child might work on several hierarchies at the same time in therapy. The need for flexibility is often encountered when beginning exposures or moving from one step of the hierarchy to another. Children often underestimate the degree of situational anxiety they experience until they are actually experiencing it. Take, for example, a child who is afraid of heights, has rated looking down from a tenth-floor window as 3 on a scale from 0 to 10 (a good starting point for exposures), but expe.riences significantly higher anxiety when the time comes to actually approach the window on the tenth floor and is unable to do it. To change the exposure activity altogether would reinforce the child’s notion that he cannot cope with his anxiety and that avoidance is a solution. As a general rule, every step on the hierarchy can be further broken down into smaller, less anxiety-provoking steps. In the previous example, several intermediate steps are possible, such as allowing the child the first time round to hold onto a piece of office furniture or to the clinician’s hand. Alternatively, a subhierarchy could be quickly established by rating the child’s anxiety when he stands 5 feet from the window, then 4 feet, 3 feet, and so on; this method would allow the child to approach the window incrementally. Similarly each step of a hierarchy contains in itself a subhierarchy whose steps are small enough not to be overwhelming. Psycho-education and building motivation The anxiety experienced by both children and their parents may be a significant obstacle to promoting motivation and engagement in exposure therapy. Parents are asked to deliberately put their children in situations that cause distress, and children are asked to endure that distress. Thus both the children and the parents may need a strong motivation to engage in exposure therapy. A clinician’s ability to effectively deliver an explanation (or rationale) of exposure therapy that gives both children and parents this kind of motivation is another important area of competence. Clinicians should be well versed in the theory underlying exposure therapy and should be able to explain it coherently both to parents and to children. As discussed more fully elsewhere, exposure is generally thought to work by modifying associations between fearful emotions, cognitions, and behavior that maintain anxiety reactions. Repeated and prolonged exposure modifies these associations by presenting information and experiences that are incompatible with the fear response. It can be helpful to introduce the cognitive behavioral conceptualization of anxiety and of its maintenance through a concrete example that does not provoke anxiety, such as fear of dogs (assuming the child does not have this fear). Using an illustration, the clini.cian begins by explaining that some people are afraid of dogs because they believe that dogs are likely to bite people. When they see a dog and become fearful, they naturally run away or avoid the dog. This reaction is quite successful in reducing anxiety for the moment. However, as these people still believe that dogs are likely to bite people, they remain scared of dogs and stuck in this cycle of fear and avoidance. The clinician emphasizes that (i) it is the thought (not the dog) that causes anxiety; (ii) avoiding dogs prevents people from learning through their own experience that dogs are relatively safe; and (iii) because avoidance is so effective at reducing unpleasant anx.iety, people rely on this strategy more and more frequently. The majority of families, even those with fairly young children, can readily understand the self-perpetuating nature of the anxiety cycle as it applies to a fear of dogs. The clinician can then describe how the cycle is broken through exposure. Here it should be explained to the child and his parents that exposure will be a gradual pro.cess; for example, it will begin with looking at pictures of dogs, then progress to being near a small dog in a cage, then to petting a small dog, then to petting a larger dog. The importance of continuing to pet the dog until the child feels safe without running away and realizes that the dog does not bite should be underscored. It is often helpful to have the child explain the model in his own words, to demonstrate understanding. At this point the clinician can work with the family to map the child’s anxiety triggers, maladaptive beliefs, and safety behaviors onto the cycle (see the section on exposure with response prevention, below) and to explain the persistence and exacerbation of symptoms in terms of a natural learning process involving negative reinforcement. This model for understanding anxiety is particularly valuable because it provides a clear rationale for treatment through exposure. Becoming competent in exposure therapy will also require involving the parents as coaches in their child’s treatment. By first observing the clinician in session and then gradually taking over more responsibility for exposure, the parent can become an active contributor to therapy. In addition, the clinician can coach the parent on effective tech.niques for responding to a child’s anxiety – such as removing the child’s attention from anxious behavior, breaking down the fear into manageable steps, and rewarding the child’s approach behavior. Ultimately the clinician may not treat all of the child’s anxiety symptoms or complete the treatment of all the steps in the child’s hierarchy. As the parent takes over coaching and the child continues to make improvements, the family can make a plan to continue the treatment on its own, holding occasional check-ins with the clinician as necessary. As we will discuss below, the extent of a parent’s involvement as a coach will depend upon the child’s developmental level; parents will likely play less of a role with more autonomous adolescents. Variations on a Theme: Competent Exposure in the Context of Different Anxiety Disorders The principles discussed above are elements common to, and important in, all forms of exposure therapy; but variations on delivering exposure therapy do exist, depending upon the type of anxiety to be treated. As many patients require exposure in multiple formats, clinicians should be competent in each area. In the following paragraphs we provide an overview of available techniques. For a more detailed discussion of these techniques, we refer the reader to Abramowitz, Deacon, and Whiteside (2011). In vivo or situational exposure Treatment of the majority of anxiety disorders includes having the child directly con.front places, situations, animals, or objects that produce anxiety – that is, in vivo exposure. Conducting this type of exposure generally requires pre-planning from the clinician in order to arrange a situation that corresponds to a step from the child’s fear hierarchy and to have available the object that causes the child to be anxious. Many of these items may not exist in the office and the clinician should be prepared to make “field trips” into the community. We generally recommend a gradual approach that begins with moderately distress.ing stimuli and progresses to more and more difficult exposures as soon as the child is ready (the child’s ability to successfully confront previously feared and avoided stimuli generally indicates that he is ready to move on). There are, however, instances when a more rapid approach is appropriate, and even recommended. Many specific phobias – fears of balloons or dogs, for example – can be treated effectively and effi.ciently in a single prolonged session of rapid exposure (e.g., Ollendick et al. 2009). Other instances may even suggest a more rapid approach to exposure (i.e., flooding) – for example when the child’s fear is circumscribed enough for all the relevant  exposures to be accomplished in a single session; when the child or her family wishes to undergo a more rapid approach; and when gradual exposure is impractical due to geographical or time constraints. Interoceptive exposures This type of exposure is generally associated with symptoms of panic and is conducted when the child fears experiencing uncomfortable internal physiological sensations. For example, some children become very distressed when they experience dizziness, short.ness of breath, heart palpitations, or sweatiness. These sensations can be aversive in and of themselves but they may also be associated with fears of crying in front of others, becoming ill, or dying. The exposure in this case is to induce on purpose the physiological sensations that the child fears; this is commonly done by having the child breathe quickly and deeply (hyperventilation), climb stairs (heart palpitations, sweatiness, shortness of breath), breathe through a straw (shortness of breath), spin in an office chair (dizziness), or sit up quickly after having sat with her head between her knees for a time (dizziness, change in blood pressure). Generally these exposures are fairly straightforward in their implementation, but it will be key for the clinician to make sure during assessment that the child actually fears the physiological sensations and not the external situation that caused them. Otherwise, if the situation is truly the trigger for anxiety, exposure would be better targeted toward that situation. Pincus, Ehrenreich, and Mattis (2008) offer a detailed discussion of interoceptive exposure. Imaginal exposure Imaginal exposure has three main applications: in directly targeting intrusive thoughts; in augmenting in vivo or interoceptive exposure; and in preparing for in vivo exposure. When imaginal exposure is used as a primary form of exposure, to address intrusive thoughts, particularly in dealing with OCD symptoms, the clinician begins by having the child describe the thoughts in as much detail as possible. Eliciting thoughts can be complicated by the child’s embarrassment or anxiety about them, as well as on account of the child’s developmental level. Once the thoughts have been identified, the clinician helps the child repeat the thoughts, orally or in writing, or listen to a recording of them – until his anxiety has diminished. The mode of exposure (e.g., oral vs. written) depends on which approach most closely replicates the child’s symptoms and can be incorporated into a graduated fear hierarchy of the hierarchy. The clinician may need to assist the child by providing examples of common unwanted thoughts that may be similar to the child’s. However, the clinician should be sensitive to the child’s developmental level and not introduce content that would be inappropriate for the child. It is understandable for clinicians and parents to feel uncomfortable about encouraging children to repeat upsetting thoughts, particularly of a violent or sexual nature. The decision about what is appropriate for an exposure is based on the child’s symptoms and how she describes them. Whatever thoughts the child is having, they need to be addressed, using the child’s words, through exposure. Imaginal exposure can also be used to augment in vivo exposures by addressing uncertainty or situations that cannot be directly confronted. For example, if a child is afraid that mummies will attack after he separates from his parents, in vivo exposure to separation could be enhanced through imaginal exposure to mummies’ breaking into his room. Finally, if it is not possible to develop a tolerable, low-anxiety in vivo exposure that a child is willing to begin with, imaginal exposure can be used as a preliminary or as a first step. Although it can be helpful, in our opinion imaginal exposure should be used infre.quently for several reasons. First, many younger children, and even some adolescents, lack the cognitive control to fully engage in imaginal exposures for an extended period of time. Second, especially when children are not intrinsically motivated to reduce their fear and to engage in exposures, it could be difficult for the clinician to ensure that the child is fully participating in imaginal exposure: a child who outwardly appears to be concentrating may actually have turned his attention away from thoughts about the feared stimulus and is mentally avoiding the exposure altogether. Finally, children and adolescents whose abstract reasoning is less developed may be less able to connect the thought exercises of imaginal exposure to reality and to generalize the experience to their everyday life. Most importantly, in vivo exposures are typically more effective than imaginal exposures and should be used whenever possible. Narrative exposure Closely related to imaginal exposure is the use of narrative to create an exposure. Narrative exposure is generally conducted in the context of anxiety related to past events and trauma, specifically for post-traumatic stress disorder. The goal of exposure is to break the link between memories, thoughts, and reminders of the trauma on the one hand and anxiety, emotional distress, and avoidance on the other (see Deblinger and Heflin 1996). Exposure in this case proceeds by asking the child to write a narrative of the events (or to draw pictures that depict them, depending upon the child’s develop.mental level), which effectively becomes the exposure that triggers the child’s anxiety response. Therapy may proceed gradually up the hierarchy by asking the child to write progressively more detail and by elaborating upon the narrative. Latter steps of the hier.archy may be to ask the child to read the narrative aloud, and eventually to share it with others (as appropriate, given the circumstances of the past event). The goal in each exposure session is to ask the child to tolerate the anxiety that remembering the event arouses in her – tolerate it, that is, long enough for habituation to occur, which means gradually increasing the extent to which the child can tolerate memories of the event. Exposure with response prevention Nearly every child who experiences anxiety displays a set of safety behaviors – actions that, when performed, serve to “neutralize” or escape from the expected negative outcome. Response prevention – preventing the child from engaging in these safety behaviors when confronted with the feared situation – should be part of every form of exposure therapy; however, it is specifically associated with the treatment of obses.sive compulsive disorder (OCD) (March and Mulle 1998). When a child with OCD experiences emotional discomfort and anxiety, he often responds with compulsions that serve to reduce his emotional tension. Exposure therapy proceeds by deliberately triggering the child’s anxiety and then asking the child not to engage in the safety behavior that would otherwise reduce his distress, but wait instead for habituation to occur. In this way the child learns (i) that the anxiety can be tolerated and will eventually dissipate on its own, without the need for compulsive rituals and routine; and (ii) that negative events are unlikely to occur. In children, it can be particularly difficult to identify safety behaviors. Some safety behaviors are fairly covert; such are crossing toes inside of shoes, making tongue movements inside of the mouth, saying prayers, and counting or performing other mental actions that are not directly observable. Further, children may initially be less motivated than their parents to engage in exposure therapy without the use of safety behaviors; thus they are not always motivated to report their safety behaviors. Some children have limited insight and are poor reporters of their own behavior, which makes their omission less intentional and more of an oversight. It will be important for the clinician to consult with the child’s parents about known safety behaviors that they have observed, although the clinician should also rely on her own clinical observations. Does the child’s anxiety and apparent distress match what would be expected for the current exposure and for what the child is reporting? Developmental Considerations in Providing Competent Exposure Therapy to Children and Adolescents As outlined above, successfully delivering exposure therapy requires competence in several specific areas; underlying each of these areas is a general competence in child development and developmental psychopathology. Working clinically with children is a complex task. Even children of similar ages will show varying levels of cognitive, social, and emotional development, which determine not only the child’s ability to report internal experiences and emotions but also the way in which the clinician will interact with the child and the role of parents in therapy. Clinicians must also be effective in managing behavior and help children work through their reluctance to engage in exposure. Finally, children are embedded within family systems that function uniquely and often contain their own sources of stress (e.g., conflict, parental psychopathology, socioeconomic factors, etc.). Clinicians must be able to work with parents who often are themselves anxious and whose responses may be maintaining their child’s anxiety (Young et al. 2013). Thus, having knowledge of developmental processes and experi.ence in working with children and families is essential if one is to become competent in delivering exposure therapy to children and adolescents. SUDs ratings Accurately assessing a child’s current level of anxiety during an exposure session is very important in determining when to end the exercise. The effect of ending the task before the child adequately achieves habituation is akin to that of behavioral avoidance in that the child’s anxiety response may be negatively reinforced: she experiences a sudden reduction in her symptoms of anxiety by leaving the situation or by removing the feared stimulus, which may prompt future avoidance of similar situations for the purpose of gaining the same symptom relief. Younger children tend to be more concrete in their cognitive abilities and have less sophistication in their recognition and regulation of emotions. Hence SUDs ratings may differ according to develop.mental level. For example, asking younger children to accurately assess their own level of anxiety on a standard 0–10 scale may be too nuanced a task. Instead, asking younger children (approximately 7 years old and younger, though this will vary according to developmental level) to rate their anxiety using a “low, medium, high” scale or a “green, yellow, red” scale may be developmentally more appropriate and yield more accurate ratings. Some younger children, over the course of engaging in exposure therapy, learn that, when they report low SUDs ratings (even if these are not exactly true), the exposure task is concluded, which brings immediate relief from anxiety. Thus, when working with younger children, no matter whether the child is intention.ally underreporting symptoms of anxiety or is developmentally not able to report symptoms accurately, the clinician may need to rely less on verbal reports of anxiety from the child. Instead, the clinician will rely more heavily on the parents’ judgment of the child’s anxiety, although she will pay careful attention to behavioral cues that the child exhibits. When in doubt, continue the exposure. There is no harm in extending an exposure even after the child’s anxiety has subsided. Adjusting parent involvement The way in which the clinician involves parents will also need to be sensitive to a child’s developmental level. The extent to which parents are involved as coaches will change as children’s cognitive, emotional, and social development becomes more sophisticated. As a rule, exposure tasks need to be completed outside of therapy sessions (e.g., as part of homework). Younger children will be more dependent upon their parents than older children for the planning and implementation of these exposures; adolescents may even be somewhat independent. Nevertheless, due to the nature of anxiety and the natural tendency of anxious children to avoid their anxiety, even very mature adolescents may require some parental monitoring and reinforcement, which should ensure that expo.sures are conducted properly and on a regular basis. In order to balance the proper degree of parent involvement with patient autonomy, the clinician will need a firm understanding of child development in general, as well as the ability to assess develop.mental level and apply it to an individual client. Choosing developmentally appropriate exposure tasks The broader purpose in exposure therapy with children is ultimately to return a child to a more normative trajectory of development. Many anxious children avoid engaging in situations that would otherwise promote the acquisition of new skills and that are generally part of the developmental process of building competence, self-confidence, and autonomy in childhood. Engaging in exposure tasks will reduce a child’s fear and anxiety, and it also presents opportunities for a child to gain experience and skill in new areas. As she is working toward competence, a clinician may ask herself: “What would I expect socially from a 14-year-old female? Is my client demonstrating behavior consistent with this developmental level? If not, how is anxiety playing a role, and how can I structure treatment so as to bring growth in these areas?” For example, exposure tasks for a child who is socially anxious with adults or authority figures may involve speaking to waiters or store clerks, practicing ordering her own food, asking adults for directions, and so on. For a teenager who struggles with similar fears, exposure tasks may involve inquiring about job applications, engaging teachers in conversation about grades, or speaking with a coach about missing practice. Thus, with a good knowledge of normative development and of the tasks that are generally mastered at particular stages of it, a clinician may choose exposures that have real-world significance for the child’s daily functioning and that promote positive development. Common Obstacles to Competently Delivering Exposure Therapy to Children and Adolescents “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step”:  Getting started We have already discussed the importance of thoroughly developing a fear hierarchy before beginning exposures. However, even presenting the concept of a fear hierarchy and beginning to discuss specific exposures can elicit anxiety and resistance from a child; parents are not immune to anxiety during this initial stage of therapy, either. Anxiety during this critical step – and how it is managed by the clinician – can set the stage for the rest of the therapy or can short-circuit it before it even begins. When a child or a parent experiences significant anxiety about the process of exposure therapy itself, it can be helpful to emphasize the gradual way in which exposure will proceed. By design, exposure begins from the lowest fear in the child’s hierarchy and progresses gradually, step by step, to the higher fears. Further, calling to mind an image of climbing up a downward-moving escalator may be helpful (be aware, however, that climbing up an escalator that goes down is decidedly counterculture, and most anxious children will not have broken such a rule – they will often laugh at the idea of it, though). Each step of the fear hierarchy is represented by a step on the escalator. The child begins by stepping onto the lowest step. As she steps up to the next step, however, the escalator has already moved down. The step that used to be rated as a 2 is now closer to a 1. As she takes another step up, the escalator has moved down yet again, and what was initially rated as a 3 is now experienced more like a 2, and so on. As the child progresses up her fear hierarchy, she is growing in confidence and ability, and the higher steps of her hierarchy are not so fearful anymore. Leaving the comfort zone: Getting out of the office Unlike many other modes of therapy, most exposures simply cannot be done in a tradi.tional psychotherapy office setting. The most obvious reason for this appears in exposure for social anxiety: generally social exposure requires a public place, in which the child can interact with people other than just the clinician. Specific fears – such as of heights, elevators, animals – will likely require field trips out of the office, too. Exposure and response prevention for OCD will require seeking out triggers for a child’s obsessions and compulsions. The competent clinician will be creative in finding and orchestrating effective exposures, often in real-life situations outside of the office. For a clinician accustomed to more traditional modes of psychotherapy, this can be frustrating for several reasons. First, when the session is held outside of the office, a clinician may not be able to hold back-to-back, traditional 50-minute sessions; it takes extra effort and time to travel and set up exposures. Second, a good amount of pre-planning is necessary to arrange for effective exposures, and this, too, requires time and effort devoted to treatment planning – again, time spent outside of the tra.ditional 50-minute session. Putting in this extra planning and energy may need to be actively modeled and encouraged by experienced mentors for clinicians who are learning exposure therapy; this will set a precedent for them. Further, compiling a list of activities that are commonly used for exposures, together with a number of places in which they can be accomplished, would reduce the amount of pre-planning that needs to be done. Finally, arranging in advance to meet a family at a particular loca.tion may help to make the session more efficient. Pacing yourself Once therapy is underway, finding the optimum pace at which to progress through the fear hierarchy can also be a common obstacle for clinicians new to exposure. Moving too quickly or too slowly are common mistakes. On the one hand, moving too quickly through the fear hierarchy may not allow for true habituation to occur at any one step; in this case the child will be facing fears that, in his hierarchy, are perhaps higher than he is ready for. When this happens, treatment dropout is more likely to occur. On the other hand, therapy that moves too slowly through the fear hierarchy can lead to boredom and discouragement with lack of progress. Further, each exposure session must follow the previous session closely enough in time so that habituation achieved in one session will carry over into the next, which leads to progressively lower SUDs ratings at the initiation of each successive session. Sticking with the game plan Once the clinician and the family have settled upon a good fear hierarchy and have identified a particular step of the hierarchy to target, we want to encourage the clini.cian to stick with the plan. It is quite natural for a weekly therapy session to begin with a “check-in,” in which parents report on how the week went for their child and what difficulties she had. However, it is often very tempting for the clinician to then choose an exposure that will address these difficulties – even if it is not what the child has been working on over the past several sessions. Don’t let the problem of the week alter the exposure plan. Doing so will likely slow overall progress; as we discussed previously, continuity between exposure sessions is necessary for habituation to carry over and to achieve progressively lower SUDs ratings. In addition, facing a brand new type of exposure every week will likely become overwhelming and discouraging for the child; on the contrary, it can be very motivating for a child to see steady progress from week to week on a single task. When parents do come up with new concerns that are based upon recent behavior or events in the child’s life, it may be enough to offer them some validation of their frustration, encouragement for their motivation and participation in therapy, as well as your commitment to returning to these issues when the time is right. The clinician may also take this opportunity to look back over the past several weeks of therapy and to highlight what progress the child has made on the current step of the fear hierarchy, expressing desire to continue working in that area so as not to lose ground. Become a fearless leader Ironically – but understandably – clinicians’ own anxiety about conducting exposures stands perhaps as the greatest obstacle to successfully delivering exposure therapy. Many clinicians fear that the exposures will not be tolerated well by children or will cause them to become more anxious. On the other hand, clinicians may worry that exposures will cause a child to become obstinate, which may lead to a battle of wills within the therapy session – a scenario no clinician looks forward to. Compounding these worries is the common belief that asking children to engage in exposures will inter.fere with the clinician’s ability to establish adequate rapport with the child. Still other clinicians fear that the parents of anxious children will not buy into the concept of exposure and will seek treatment elsewhere. Each of these concerns is legitimate and constitutes a possible scenario with any given family. However, all of them are also manageable. Typically, anxious children are eager to please and will do well in therapy when given the support necessary to do so. Make therapy (even exposure therapy) fun! By being energetic and enthusiastic with parents and children alike, the clinician can create an atmosphere that is upbeat, engaging, and motivating. Many children enjoy the active nature of exposure therapy, and, if the clinician is able to put himself into the exposure and lead by example, many children who are at first reticent to begin will come along and will be engaged in the exposure. At the same time, being able to make mistakes (even to role-model making mistakes) and to make light of them with the child helps to keep the mood light. When a child is reluctant or refuses to engage in an exposure during a treatment session, the clinician should not be afraid to back up, admit that perhaps treatment moved too quickly up the hierarchy, and find a way to break down the task into smaller steps. This will likely defuse the situation rather than make it escalate into a contest of wills. Parents often face similar situations at home while coaching the child to complete exposure homework assignments between sessions: they come for session the next week only to report that exposures went “horribly wrong” when the child’s SUDs ratings went “through the roof” and he subsequently refused to proceed. This can happen early in the process of therapy, before children have had much oppor.tunity to gain success and confidence with exposures, when parents are first learning to become effective coaches. Parents should be coached and clinicians may want to role-model creatively finding ways in which to break down the task into smaller, easier steps. Whether these challenges occur during the session or while completing homework assignments, it is important to expect the child to make a step forward in facing her fears and not allow continued avoidance. As always, liberal positive reinforcement – both verbal praise and tangible rewards – goes a long way in moti.vating children to participate. Finally, we recommend that the reluctant clinician begin to reconceptualize exposure therapy. Without intervention, many children with an anxiety disorder would otherwise be at risk for missing important developmental experiences. Exposure provides children with “developmental guidance.” Through exposure, the clinician is teaching the child new ways to interact with her world and how to bravely approach the things that cause fear, thereby promoting positive character development. References Abramowitz, Jonathan S., Brett J. Deacon, and Stephen P. Whiteside. 2011. Exposure Therapy for Anxiety: Principles and Practice. New York: Guilford Press. Addis, Michael E., and Aaron D. Krasnow. 2000. “A National Survey of Practicing Psychologists’ Attitudes toward Psychotherapy Treatment Manuals.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68: 331–9. DOI 10.1037/0022-006X.68.2.331 Beidel, Deborah C., and Samuel M. Turner. 2007. Shy Children, Phobic Adults: Nature and Treatment of Social Anxiety Disorder (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Deblinger, Esther, and Anne H. Heflin. 1996. Treating Sexually Abused Children and Their Nonoffending Parents: A Cognitive–Behavioral Approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Kendall, Philip C., Erika U. Brady, and Timothy L. Verduin. 2001. “Comorbidity in Childhood Anxiety Disorders and Treatment Outcome.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40: 787–94. DOI: 10.1097/00004583-200107000-00013 Kendall, Philip C., Joanna A. Robin, Kristina A. Hedtke, Cynthia Suveg, Ellen Flannery-Schroeder, and Elizabeth Gosch. 2005. “Considering CBT with Anxious Youth? Think Exposures.” Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12: 136–50. DOI: S1077722905800483 In-Albon, Tina, and Silvia Schneider. 2007. “Psychotherapy of Childhood Anxiety Disorders: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics, 76: 15–24. DOI: 10.1159/000096361 Lang, Peter J. 1967. “Fear Reduction and Fear Behavior: Problems in Treating a Construct.” In John M. Shlien (Ed.), Research in Psychotherapy (vol. 3, pp. 332–68). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. March, John S., and Karen Mulle. 1998. OCD in Children and Adolescents: A Cognitive– Behavioral Treatment Manual. New York: Guilford Press. Ollendick, Thomas H., Lars Ost, Lena Reuterskiold, Rio Cederlund, Cristian Sirbu, Thompson E. Davis III, Matthew A. Jarrett. 2009. “One-Session Treatment of Specific Phobias in Youth: A Randomized Clinical Trial in the United States and Sweden.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77: 504–16. DOI: 10.1037/a0015158 Pincus, Donna B., Jill T. Ehrenreich, and Sara G. Mattis. 2008. Mastery of Anxiety and Panic for Adolescents: Riding the Wave: Therapist Guide. New York: Oxford University Press. Seligman, Laura D., and Thomas H. Ollendick. 2011. “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Anxiety Disorders in Children and Adolescents.” Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 20: 217–38. DOI: 10.1016/j.chc.2011.01.003 Valderhaug, Robert, K. Gunnar Gotestam, and Bo Larsson. 2004. “Clinicians’ Views on Management of Obsessive–Compulsive Disorders in Children and Adolescents.” Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 58: 125–32. Young, Brennan J., Dustin P. Wallace, Mark Imig, Lonnie Borgerding, Amy M. Brown-Jacobsen, and Stephen P. Whiteside. 2013. “Parenting Behaviors and Childhood Anxiety: A Psychometric Investigation of the EMBU-C.” Manuscript submitted for publication. 