CHAPTER NINE Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Acute Stress Disorder Richard A. Bryant The persistent distress that can be suffered by many trauma survivors has led to unprecedented attention on creating ways to prevent this distress. Much of this attention has focused on early interventions with people who are high risk for developing long-term disorders. This chapter reviews recent develop.ments in the early identification of people who are high risk for posttraumat.ic stress disorder (PTSD). The chapter initially addresses the utility of the acute stress disorder (ASD) diagnosis as a marker of people who require early intervention. The review then proceeds to outline the major develop.ments in assessment and treatment of people with ASD, and provides practi.cal guidelines for managing people in the acute phase after trauma. THE COURSE OF ACUTE STRESS REACTIONS Across the literature, there are reports of high rates of emotional numbing (Feinstein, 1989; Noyes, Hoenk, Kuperman, & Slymen, 1977), reduced awareness of one’s environment (Berah, Jones, & Valent, 1984; Hillman, 1981), derealization (Carde & Spiegel, 1993; Noyes & Kletti, 1977; Sloan, 1988; Freinkel, Koopman, & Spiegel, 1994), depersonalization (Noyes et al., 1977; Carde & Spiegel, 1993; Sloan, 1988; Freinkel et al., 1994), intrusive thoughts (Feinstein, 1989; Carde & Spiegel, 1993; Sloan, 1988), avoidance behaviors (Carde & Spiegel, 1993; North, Smith, McCool, & Lightcap, 1989; Bryant & Harvey, 1996), insomnia (Feinstein, 1989; Carde & Spiegel, 1993; Sloan, 1988), concentration deficits (Carde & Spiegel, 1993; North et al., 1989), irritability (Sloan, 1988), and autonomic arousal (Feinstein, 1989; Sloan, 1988) in the weeks after a traumatic experience. Despite the high prevalence of acute stress reactions, it appears that 201 most of these stress responses are transient. For example, whereas 94% of rape victims displayed sufficient PTSD symptoms 2 weeks posttrauma to meet DSM-IV criteria (excluding the 1 month time requirement; American Psychiatric Association, 1994), this rate had dropped to 47% 11 weeks later (Rothbaum, Foa, Riggs, Murdock, & Walsh, 1992). In another study 70% of women and 50% of men were diagnosed with PTSD at an average of 19 days after an assault; the rate of PTSD at 4-month follow-up had dropped to 21% for women and 0% for men (Riggs, Rothbaum, & Foa, 1995). Similarly, half of a sample of individuals who met criteria for PTSD shortly after a motor vehicle accident had remitted by 6 months, and two-thirds had remitted by 1.year posttrauma (Blanchard et al., 1996). There is also evidence that most stress responses after the terrorist attacks of September 11 may have been temporary reactions. Galea et al. (2002) surveyed residents of New York City to gauge their response to the terrorist attacks. Five to eight weeks after the attacks, 7.5% of a random sample of adults living south of 110th Street in Manhattan had developed PTSD, and of those living south of Canal Street, 20% had PTSD. In February 2002, Galea’s group did a study on another group of adults living south of 110th Street and found that only 1.7% of the sample had PTSD related to the attacks (Galea, Boscarino, Resnick, & Vlahov, in press). The available evidence suggests that the normative response to trauma is to initially experience a range of PTSD symptoms, which remit in the following months. ACUTE STRESS DISORDER In 1994 the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) introduced the ASD diagnosis to describe stress reactions in the initial month following a trauma. It was felt that because DSM-IV stipulated that PTSD could only be recognized at least 1 month after a trauma, there was a need to describe reactions occurring in the initial month. A second goal was to identify peo.ple who would develop PTSD shortly after trauma exposure (Koopman, Classen, Carde, & Spiegel, 1995). The DSM-IV stipulates that ASD can occur after a fearful response to experiencing or witnessing a threatening event (cluster A). The requisite symptoms to meet criteria for ASD include three dissociative symptoms (cluster B), one reexperiencing symptom (clus.ter C), marked avoidance (cluster D), marked anxiety or increased arousal (cluster E), and evidence of significant distress or impairment (cluster F). The disturbance must last for a minimum of 2 days and a maximum of 4 weeks (cluster G), after which time a diagnosis of PTSD should be consid.ered. The primary difference between the criteria for ASD and PTSD is the time frame and the former’s emphasis on dissociative reactions to the trau.ma. ASD refers to symptoms manifested during the period from 2 days to 4 weeks posttrauma, whereas PTSD can only be diagnosed 4 weeks posttrau.ma. The diagnosis of ASD requires that the individual has at least three of the following: (1) a subjective sense of numbing or detachment, (2) reduced awareness of his or her surroundings, (3) derealization, (4) depersonaliza.tion, or (5) dissociative amnesia. The ASD diagnosis was largely influenced by the notion that dissociative reactions are a crucial mechanism in posttraumatic adjustment. Expressing this view much earlier, Janet (1907) proposed that traumatic experiences that were incongruent with existing cognitive schemas led to dissociated awareness. He argued that although this splitting of traumatic memories from awareness led to a reduction in distress, there was a loss of mental func.tioning because mental resources were not available for other processes. This perspective has received much attention in recent years (van der Kolk & van der Hart, 1989; Nemiah, 1989) and represents the basis for the pivotal role of dissociation in the ASD diagnosis. DOES ASD PREDICT PTSD? There are now 12 prospective studies of adults that have assessed the rela.tionship between ASD in the initial month posttrauma and development of subsequent PTSD (Brewin, Andrews, Rose, & Kirk, 1999; Bryant & Harvey, 1998; Creamer, O’Donnell, & Pattison, 2004; Difede et al., 2002; Harvey & Bryant, 1998a, 1999b, 2000a; Holeva, Tarrier, & Wells, 2001; Kangas, Henry, & Bryant, 2005; Murray, Ehlers, & Mayou, 2002; Schnyder, Moergeli, Klaghofer, & Buddeberg, 2001; Staab, Grieger, Fullerton, & Ursano, 1996). In terms of people who meet criteria for ASD, some studies have found that approximately three-quarters of trauma survivors who display ASD subse.quently develop PTSD (Brewin et al., 1999; Bryant & Harvey, 1998; Difede et al., 2002; Harvey & Bryant, 1998a, 1999b, 2000a; Holeva et al., 2001; Kangas et al., 2005; Murray et al., 2002). Compared to the expected remission of most people who display initial posttraumatic stress reactions, these studies indicate that the ASD diagnosis is performing reasonably well in predicting people who will develop PTSD. However, the utility of the ASD diagnosis is less encouraging when we consider the proportion of people who eventually developed PTSD and who initially displayed ASD. In most studies the minor.ity of people who eventually developed PTSD initially met criteria for ASD. That is, whereas the majority of people who develop ASD are at high risk for developing subsequent PTSD, many people develop PTSD who do not ini.tially meet ASD criteria. It appears that a major reason for this discrepancy between high risk for PTSD and unfulfilled ASD criteria is the requirement of three dissociative symptoms. In one study, 60% of people who met all ASD criteria except for the dissociation cluster met PTSD criteria 6 months later (Harvey & Bryant, 1998a), and 75% of these people still had PTSD 2 years later (Harvey & Bryant, 1999b). This pattern suggests that emphasizing dissociation as a critical factor in predicting subsequent PTSD leads to a neglect of other acute stress reactions that also represent a risk for develop.ment of chronic PTSD. IMPLICATIONS FOR ASSESSING ASD There have been numerous criticisms of the ASD diagnosis (see Koopman, 2000; Simeon & Guralnik, 2000; Butler, 2000; Bryant & Harvey, 2000; Harvey & Bryant, 2002; Keane, Kaufman, & Kimble, 2001; Marshall, Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 2000; Spiegel, Classen, Carde, 2000). First, the new ASD diagnosis was introduced with very little evidence to support its inclusion. Whereas inclusion of other diagnoses in the DSM-IV required satisfaction of a number of standards (including literature reviews, statistical analyses of established datasets, and field trials), the ASD diagnosis did not undergo this rigorous scrutiny (Bryant, 2000). Second, the emphasis on dissociation as a necessary response to trauma was criticized on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence to warrant assigning such a pivotal role in acute trauma response to this construct (Bryant & Harvey, 1997; Keane et al., 2001; Mar.shall et al., 2000). As noted above, the available evidence suggests that the requirement of dissociation leads to oversight of many high-risk people. Third, some objected to the notion that the primary role of the ASD diagno.sis was to predict another diagnosis (McNally, 2003). Fourth, there was con.cern that the diagnosis may pathologize transient reactions (Marshall, Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 1999). Fifth, it was argued that distinguishing between two diagnoses (ASD and PTSD) that have comparable symptoms on the basis of the duration of these symptoms is not justified (Marshall et al., 1999). These criticisms raise questions about the utility of the ASD diagnosis to identify people in the acute phase who are at high risk for subsequent PTSD. Although the data are mixed at this point, it appears that people who satisfy the ASD criteria are at high risk for PTSD and require therapeutic interven.tion. Additionally, people who display intense acute stress reactions, although lacking dissociative responses, are also at high risk and should be identified as candidates for early intervention. To further increase the accu.racy of early identification of people who are at high risk for PTSD, recent attention has also focused on acute cognitive and biological factors that appear to be associated with development of later PTSD. COGNITIVE MECHANISMS OF ASD Current models posit that psychopathological responses may be mediated by two core cognitive factors: (1) maladaptive appraisals of the trauma and its aftermath, and (2) disturbances in autobiographical memory that involve impaired retrieval and strong associative memory (Ehlers & Clark, 2000). Consistent with this approach is evidence that people with ASD exaggerate both the probability of future negative events occurring and the adverse effects of these events (Warda & Bryant, 1998a). Moreover, ASD participants display cognitive biases for events related to external harm, somatic sensa.tions, and social concerns (Smith & Bryant, 2000). Experimental studies indi.cate that ASD individuals respond to a hyperventilation task with more dys.functional interpretations about their reactions than non-ASD individuals (Nixon & Bryant, 2003). There is also evidence that catastrophic appraisals about self in the period after trauma exposure predict subsequent PTSD (Ehlers, Mayou, & Bryant, 1998b; Engelhard, van den Hout, Arntz, & McNally, 2002). Relatedly, the nature of attributions about the trauma shortly after the event apparently influences longer-term functioning. Pro.spective studies indicate that attributing responsibility to another person (Delahanty et al., 1997) and attributions of shame (Andrews, Brewin, Rose, & Kirk, 2000) in the acute phase are associated with later PTSD. There is also evidence that people with ASD may manage trauma-related information differently from other trauma survivors. Specifically, individuals with ASD tend to avoid aversive information. One study employed a directed forgetting paradigm that required ASD, non-ASD, and non-trauma-exposed control participants to read a series of trauma-related, positive, or neutral words, after each presentation participants were instructed to either remember or forget the word (Moulds & Bryant, 2002). The finding that ASD participants recalled fewer trauma-related to-be-forgot.ten words than non-ASD participants suggests that they have an aptitude for forgetting aversive material. In a similar study that employed the list method form of directed forgetting, which indexes retrieval patterns, ASD partici.pants displayed poorer recall of to-be-forgotten trauma words than non-ASD participants (Moulds & Bryant, 2005). These findings suggest that people with ASD possess a cognitive style that avoids awareness of aversive or dis.tressing information. This interpretation accords with findings that people with ASD use avoidant cognitive strategies to manage their trauma memo.ries (Guthrie & Bryant, 2000; Warda & Bryant, 1998b). Avoidance of dis.tressing information or memories may be associated with psychopathologi.cal responses because it may lead to impaired processing of trauma-related memories and affect. In terms of autobiographical memory, one study has found that ASD participants reported fewer specific positive memories than non-ASD participants, and this deficit contributed to subsequent PTSD severity (Harvey, Bryant, & Dang, 1998). This pattern may suggest that prob.lems in retrieving positive memories about one’s personal past may limit access to information that is useful in making adaptive appraisals about the trauma and its consequences (Ehlers & Clark, 2000). BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS OF ASD Biological perspectives have focused on fear conditioning and progressive neural sensitization in the weeks after trauma as possible explanations of the genesis of PTSD (Kolb, 1987; Pitman, Shalev, & Orr, 2000). It is possible that sensitization occurs as a result of repetitive activation by trauma reminders, which elevate sensitivity of limbic networks (Post, Weiss, & Smith, 1995), and that as time progresses these responses become increasingly conditioned to trauma-related stimuli (LeDoux, Iwata, Cicchetti, & Reis, 1988). In support of these proposals, there is evidence that people who eventually develop PTSD display elevated resting heart rates in the initial week after trauma (Bryant, Harvey, Guthrie, & Moulds, 2000b; Shalev et al., 1998; see also Blanchard, Hickling, Gaslovski, & Veazey, 2002). There is also evidence that lower cortisol levels shortly after trauma predict subsequent PTSD (McFarlane, Atchison, & Yehuda, 1997; Delahanty, Raimonde, & Spoonster, 2000). Cortisol may act as an “anti-stress” hormone that restores equilib.rium, and lower cortisol levels may reflect an incapacity to lower arousal fol.lowing trauma (Yehuda, 1997). The importance of increased arousal in the acute phase is also indicated by the prevalence of panic attacks in people with ASD (Bryant & Panasetis, 2001; Nixon & Bryant, 2003). A promising finding emerged from a pilot study that attempted to prevent PTSD by administering propranolol (a beta-adrenergic blocker) within 6 hours of trau.ma exposure (Pitman et al., 2002); there is evidence that propanolol abol.ishes the epinephrine enhancement of conditioning (Cahill, Prins, Weber, & McGaugh, 1994). Although propanolol did not result in reduced PTSD rela.tive to a placebo condition, patients receiving propanolol displayed less reac.tivity to trauma reminders 3 months later. A subsequent study has found that propanolol administered immediately after trauma does reduce PTSD severity 2 months later (Vaiva et al., 2003). This outcome suggests that propanolol administration shortly after trauma exposure may limit the fear conditioning that may contribute to subsequent PTSD development. Measurement Tools for ASD There are currently three structured measures specifically designed to assess for ASD. The first measure to be developed was the Stanford Acute Stress Reaction Questionnaire (SASRQ). The original version of the SASRQ (Carde, Classen, & Spiegel, 1991) was a self-report inventory that indexed dissociative (33 items), intrusive (11 items), somatic anxiety (17 items), hyperarousal (2 items), attention disturbance (3 items), and sleep distur.bance (1 item) symptoms, and different versions of this measure have been employed by the authors across a range of studies (Carde & Spiegel, 1993; Classen, Koopman, Hales, & Spiegel, 1998; Freinkel et al., 1994; Koopman, Classen, & Spiegel, 1994). Each item asks respondents to indicate the fre.quency of each symptom on a 6-point Likert scale (0 = “not experienced”; 5 = “very often experienced”) that may occur during and immediately following a trauma. The SASRQ possesses high internal consistency (Cronbachs alpha = .90 and .91 for dissociative and anxiety symptoms, respectively) and con.current validity with scores on the IES (r = .52–.69; Koopman et al., 1994). Different versions of the SASRQ have been employed in a number of studies conducted by the authors (Carde & Spiegel, 1989; Classen et al., 1998; Freinkel et al., 1994; Koopman et al., 1994). The current version of the SASRQ (Carde, Koopman, Classen, Waelde, & Spiegel, 2000) is a 30-item self-report inventory that encompasses each of the ASD symptoms. At this stage, the SASRQ has not been validated against independent clinician-diag.nosed ASD diagnosis. Although SASRQ scores are predictive of subsequent posttraumatic stress symptomatology, there is limited data concerning SASRQ scores and subsequent PTSD diagnostic status. The Acute Stress Disorder Interview (ASDI; Bryant, Harvey, Dang, & Sackville, 1998a) is a structured clinical interview that is based on DSM-IV criteria. The ASDI contains 19 dichotomously scored items that relate to the dissociative (cluster B, five items), reexperiencing (cluster C, four items), avoidance (cluster D, four items), and arousal (cluster E, six items) symptoms of ASD. Summing the affirmative responses to each symptom provides a total score indicative of acute stress severity (range, 1–19). The ASDI pos.sesses good internal consistency (r = .90), test–retest reliability (r = .88), sensi.tivity (91%), and specificity (93%) relative to independent clinician diagnosis of ASD. The ASDI has also been used in prospective studies that have identi.fied recently trauma-exposed people who subsequently develop PTSD (Bryant & Harvey, 1998; Harvey & Bryant, 1998a, 1999b, 2000a). The Acute Stress Disorder Scale (ASDS; Bryant, Moulds, & Guthrie, 2000a) is a self-report inventory that is based on the same items described in the ASDI. Each item on the ASDS is scored on a 5-point Likert scale that reflects degrees of severity. It was validated against the ASDI on 99 civilian trauma survivors assessed between 2 and 10 days posttrauma. Using a for.mula to identify ASD cases, the ASDS possessed good sensitivity (95%) and specificity (83%). Test–retest reliability was evaluated on 107 bushfire survi.vors 3 weeks posttrauma, with a re-administration interval of 2 to 7 days. Test–retest reliability of the ASDS scores was strong (r = 0.94). Predictive ability of the ASDS was investigated in 82 trauma survivors who completed the ASDS and were subsequently assessed for PTSD 6 months posttrauma. A cutoff score of 56 on the ASDS predicted 91% of those who developed PTSD and 93% of those who did not. The major limitation of the ASDS in predict.ing PTSD, however, was that one-third of people who scored above the cut.off did not develop PTSD. It needs to be noted that these measures of ASD suffer from the same limitations of the ASD diagnosis. That is, requiring dissociation to be present will probably result in the oversight of many high-risk individuals, possibly preventing them from receiving treatment from which they could benefit. One way to increase the likelihood of accurately identifying people who will develop PTSD is to delay the assessment for several weeks after trauma expo.sure. It is very probable that the sooner a clinician diagnoses ASD after trau.ma exposure, the more likely he or she will confuse a psychopathological response with a transient stress reaction. There is some evidence from a study of civilians involved in the Gulf War that many people experience immediate posttraumatic stress reactions in the initial days after trauma exposure but that these reactions subsequently remit (Solomon, Laor, & McFarlane, 1996). One study found that whereas 77% of people who were diagnosed with ASD at 4 weeks posttrauma subsequently developed PTSD, only 32% of those diagnosed with ASD 1 week posttrauma subsequently met criteria for PTSD (Murray et al., 2002). WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE FOR CBT’S EFFECTIVENESS? Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) typically comprises psychoeducation, anxiety management, stress inoculation, cognitive restructuring, imaginal and in vivo exposure, and relapse prevention. Although there is considerable evidence for the efficacy of CBT in reducing PTSD symptoms in people with chronic PTSD (for reviews, see Bryant & Friedman, 2001; Foa & Meadows, 1997; Foa, 2001; Harvey, Bryant, & Tarrier, 2002), there is a limited evidence base for early interventions using CBT. Apart from uncontrolled studies of early interventions that employed some CBT approaches (Brom, Kleber, & Hofman, 1993; Viney, Clark, Bunn, & Benjamin, 1985), the first attempts at controlled study of early intervention applied behavioral approaches. Kilpat.rick and Veronen (1984) randomly allocated 15 recent rape victims to either repeated assessments, delayed assessment, or a brief behavioral intervention that comprised a 4-to 6-hour program that involved imaginal reliving of the trauma, education about psychological responses to trauma, cognitive restructuring, and anxiety management. The brief intervention was no more effective than the repeated assessments. This study was limited, however, by small sample sizes, the lack of rigorous application of exposure, and ambigu.ity about the degree of psychopathology experienced after the rape (Kilpat.rick & Calhoun, 1988). Foa and colleagues conducted a more rigorous study by providing brief CBT to victims of sexual and nonsexual assault shortly after the trauma (Foa, Hearst-Ikeda, & Perry, 1995). This study compared participants who received CBT (including exposure, anxiety management, in vivo exposure, and cogni.tive restructuring) to matched participants who received repeated assess.ments. Each participant received four treatment sessions and then received assessment by blind assessors at 2 months posttreatment and at 5-month fol.low-up. Whereas 10% of the CBT group met criteria for PTSD at 2 months, 70% of the control group met criteria; there were no differences between groups at 5 months, although the CBT group was less depressed. This study suggests that CBT may accelerate natural recovery from trauma. Inferences from this study were limited, however, by the lack of random assignment. In a subsequent study, Foa, Zoellner, and Feeny (2002) randomly allocated sur.vivors of assault who met criteria for PTSD in the initial weeks after the assault to four weekly sessions of CBT, repeated assessment, or supportive counseling (SC). At posttreatment, patients in the CBT and repeated-assess.ment conditions showed comparable improvements. SC was associated with greater PTSD severity and greater general anxiety than the CBT group. At 9.month follow-up, approximately 30% of participants in each group met crite.ria for PTSD. A potential limitation of these studies is that the inclusion of all recently distressed trauma survivors raises the possibility that treatment effects may overlap with natural recovery in the initial months after trauma exposure. In an attempt to overcome this problem, other studies have focused on people who meet criteria for ASD because of evidence that most people who do dis.play ASD are at high risk for subsequent PTSD (Bryant, 2003). In an initial study of ASD participants, Bryant and colleagues randomly allocated motor vehicle accident or nonsexual assault survivors with ASD to either CBT or SC (Bryant, Harvey, Dang, Sackville, & Basten, 1998b). Both interventions consisted of five 1.5-hour weekly individual therapy sessions. CBT included education about posttraumatic reactions, relaxation training, cognitive restructuring, and imaginal and in vivo exposure to the traumatic event. The SC condition included trauma education and more general problem-solving skills training in the context of an unconditionally supportive relationship. At the 6-month follow-up, fewer participants in the CBT group (20%) met diagnostic criteria for PTSD, compared to SC control participants (67%). In a subsequent study that dismantled the components of CBT, 45 civilian trau.ma survivors with ASD were randomly allocated to five sessions of either (1) prolonged exposure, cognitive therapy, anxiety management; (2) prolonged exposure and cognitive therapy; or (3) SC (Bryant, Sackville, Dang, Moulds, & Guthrie, 1999). This study found that at the 6-month follow-up, PTSD was observed in approximately 20% of both active treatment groups compared to 67% of those receiving SC. A follow-up of participants who completed these two treatment studies indicated that the treatment gains of those who received CBT were maintained 4 years after treatment (Bryant, Moulds, & Nixon, 2003b). Two recent studies by the same research group have supported the util.ity of CBT for people with ASD. One study randomly allocated civilian trau.ma survivors (N = 89) with ASD to either CBT, CBT associated with hypno.sis, or SC (Bryant, Moulds, Guthrie, & Nixon, 2005). This study added hypnosis to CBT because some commentators have argued that hypnosis may breach dissociative symptoms that characterize ASD (Spiegel, 1996). To this end, the hypnosis component was provided immediately prior to imaginal exposure in an attempt to facilitate emotional processing of the trauma memories. In terms of treatment completers, more participants in the SC condition (57%) met PTSD criteria at 6-month follow-up than those in the CBT (21%) or CBT + hypnosis (22%) condition. Interestingly, partici.pants in the CBT + hypnosis condition reported greater reduction of reexperiencing symptoms at posttreatment than those in the CBT condition. This finding suggests that hypnosis may facilitate treatment gains in ASD participants. Finally, a recent study replicated the original Bryant et al. (1998b) study with a sample of ASD participants (N = 24) who had sustained mild traumatic brain injury following motor vehicle accidents (Bryant et al., 2003a). This study investigated the efficacy of CBT in people who lost con.sciousness during the trauma as result of their injury. Consistent with the previous studies, fewer participants receiving CBT (8%) met criteria for PTSD at 6-month follow-up than those receiving SC (58%). Gidron et al. (2001) provided a two-session CBT intervention that was intended to promote memory reconstruction in 17 survivors of accidents. This approach was based on the premise that facilitating people’s organiza.tion of trauma memories would assist processing of these memories and thereby assist recovery. Using an entry criterion of a heart rate higher than 94 beats per minute at admission to the emergency room (see Bryant et al., 2000a; Shalev et al., 1998), participants in this study received a telephone-administered protocol 1–3 days after the accident. Patients who received this intervention had greater reductions in severity of PTSD symptoms 3–4 months after the trauma than did those who received two sessions of sup.portive listening over the telephone. DELIVERING CBT SHORTLY AFTER TRAUMA Prior to commencing therapy, it is imperative to make important decisions about treatment delivery. These decisions include (1) when should therapy begin?, (2) how long should therapy continue? (3) how often should therapy be provided?, and (4) to whom should therapy be delivered? In terms of the commencement of therapy, some commentators have proposed that treating the person with ASD should occur “as soon after the trauma as possible” (Spiegel & Classen, 1995, p. 1526). However, it may be better to delay active CBT for a week or several weeks after trauma exposure, if doing so would allow the individual to accrue more resources to allocate to therapy. Treating people several weeks after trauma (1) allows them additional time to muster the resources that they can allocate to therapy, (2) decreases the likelihood that presenting symptoms will prove to be transient reactions to the trauma, and (3) increases the opportunity to resolve the immediate problems associ.ated with the traumatic event. Duration of therapy should be determined by therapy response and fac.tors occurring in the period following trauma. Although most published treat.ment studies have employed five or six therapy sessions of 1.–2 hours, addi.tional sessions may be required if the individual displays some clinical gains from the therapy but has not achieved adequate recovery, or ongoing stresses are impeding recovery and the individual would benefit from additional work. Therapy typically occurs on a weekly basis, but this format may be modified for a number of reasons. Hospital patients who may be discharged or military per.sonnel who will be deployed in the near future and cannot attend therapy may be given massed (i.e., perhaps daily) therapy sessions. Some individuals may display excessive avoidance that precludes effective therapy; these patients can also benefit from daily sessions to minimize the avoidance that may accumu.late when a week separates each therapy session. Perhaps the most important decision that needs to be made is whether an individual is suitable for CBT shortly after trauma. Although there is no uniform rule that precludes any individual from early intervention, there are several clinical factors that need to be considered carefully and that may lead to the clinical decision to delay active CBT for some individuals. Excessive Avoidance Although strong avoidance tendencies are present in nearly all cases of ASD, degree of avoidance in a proportion of individuals impedes any form of exposure-based therapy. For example, some patients may not attend therapy sessions, be late for sessions, refuse to comply with exposure homework, or perform exposure in a superficial manner. This level of avoidance can reduce therapy efficacy and can lead patients to believe that they are not responsive to CBT. In cases of extreme avoidance, the therapist should con.sider the functional significance of this behavior. Some individuals employ extreme avoidance in the acute phase as a means of warding off distress that they cannot tolerate. For instance, a patient who had a hand traumatically amputated in an industrial accident was not able to look at his hand during the initial interview. Even when the interviewer requested that he glance at his hand, he refused because of an inability to tolerate the resulting distress. It is often better not to use exposure-based therapies with these individuals because treatment in the acute phase may exacerbate, rather than alleviate, their distress. Dissociation The emotional detachment associated with dissociative responses can impede engagement with traumatic memories and thereby limit the utility of any therapy approach that requires emotional processing (Foa & Hearst-Ikeda, 1996). This problem can occur in ASD because of the prevalence of dissociation in this condition. Therapists should be sensitive to the presenta.tion of marked dissociation because it may indicate a defense against over.whelming distress that the person may not be able to manage in the acute phase. Marked dissociation may include the absence of any apparent affect in a patient whom one would expect to be distressed, staring into space dur.ing discussion of the trauma, or persistent periods of thinking about other matters when asked to focus on the trauma. It is important to distinguish between distractibility associated with hyperarousal and dissociation. Many patients display poor attentional focus, but they can be directed back to their trauma narrative by simple requests. In contrast, dissociation tends to reflect a more pervasive and repetitive inability to focus on trauma memories. Breaching dissociative responses in the acute phase may be detrimental because it may reduce the individual’s control over his or her distress. Thera.pists should be sensitive to the potentially protective role that dissociative and avoidant responses can play in the acute phase. Respecting this function of dissociation, therapists should consider patients’ psychological resources and their capacity to tolerate their distress. Those individuals who display signs of psychological instability may fare better with supportive therapy, which would allow them to stabilize their acute reaction prior to more direct therapeutic intervention. Anger Anger is a very common response following a traumatic experience (Hyer et al., 1986; Riggs, Dancu, Gershuny, Greenberg, & Foa, 1992). It has been pro.posed that anger may serve to inhibit anxiety following a trauma, especially when effortful avoidance is unsuccessful (Riggs et al., 1995). Indeed, patients who display anger during the initial narrative tend not to respond positively to exposure therapy (Foa et al., 1995; Jaycox, Perry, Freshman, Stafford, & Foa, 1995). People who present with anger as the primary emotional response may benefit more from anger management strategies, including anxiety management and cognitive therapy techniques (Chemtob, Novaco, Hamada, & Gross, 1997). Grief Grief also is a very common reaction following a traumatic experience (Raphael & Martinek, 1997). Moreover, posttraumatic stress and grief can interact to compound the clinical presentation (Goenjian et al., 1995; Horowitz, Weiss, & Marmar, 1987). It is important to recognize that the bereavement process requires time, and it may not be appropriate to provide acutely grieving patients with exposure when they are coming to terms with their loss. One woman was referred to a PTSD unit after a road accident in which her young baby had died. She had been trapped in the car for several hours with her dead child lying on her lap. This scene represented the primary content of her intrusive memories. The referral document expressly requested exposure therapy to reduce this woman’s intrusive images of her dead child lying in her lap. In the context of considerable grief and guilt issues that needed to be addressed, providing this woman with exposure therapy only weeks after the accident would most probably have been harmful. Therapists need to help people deal with their grief reactions and ensure that active inter.ventions for ASD do not interfere with the natural grief process (see Fleming & Robinson, 2001). Extreme Anxiety Some individuals present with very extreme anxiety that often may reflect pretrauma anxiety states. Moreover, many people present with panic attacks following trauma (Nixon & Bryant, 2003). Employing exposure therapy with these individuals in the acute phase can compound their anxiety state and their posttraumatic difficulties. Instead, these individuals may require con.tainment, support, and anxiety reduction strategies. Some individuals bene.fit from techniques that limit panic attacks, including interoceptive exposure and cognitive restructuring (Craske & Barlow, 1993). Many people in the acute phase also require assistance in learning how to tolerate distress and in developing skills in reducing their anxiety states (see Cloitre & Rosenberg, Chapter 13, this volume). Catastrophic Beliefs Individuals who present with strong ruminations or catastrophic appraisals of their experience and their capacity to cope may not benefit from expo.sure. One study found that exposure was not successful if the individual’s narrative of the trauma was characterized by mental defeat or lack of mas.tery over the situation (Ehlers et al., 1998a). These individuals require care.ful cognitive restructuring, and exposure should be considered only when their tendency to ruminate has been modified. Prior Trauma It is common for people who have suffered unresolved traumatic experi.ences prior to the recent trauma to be distressed by memories of both the recent stressor and the earlier experience. A police officer who attended our PTSD unit denied any earlier traumatic experience but during exposure was very distressed by memories of childhood abuse that he had avoided for many years. Many people find it difficult to deal with developmental or pre.vious traumatic experiences when they are in an emotionally fragile state because of the recent traumatic experience. Allowing the posttraumatic upheaval to settle before addressing longer-term traumatic memories can sometimes lead to a better outcome. Comorbidity Therapists need to be aware of comorbid (and often preexisting) disorders that may be exacerbated by the distress elicited by exposure. Some of the more problematic preexisting disorders include borderline personality disor.der and people with psychotic histories. People with these problems can experience marked deterioration, including psychotic episodes, severe disso.ciative states, and self-destructive tendencies, when confronted with expo.sure to traumatic memories. Caution is required; it is often wiser to offer support for containing their preexisting disorder than to resolve their trau.matic experience in the acute phase. Managing the complexity of comorbid disorders often involves integration of other techniques (see Wagner & Linehan, Chapter 6, this volume), Substance Abuse Substance abuse is a common comorbidity following trauma (Kulka et al., 1990). Intake of abusing substances needs to be monitored carefully because it can limit the capacity of an individual to engage the anxiety response dur.ing exposure. Further, people who have a tendency toward substance abuse may increase their reliance on the substance as a means of coping with the distress associated with exposure. Moreover, reliance on substances in the acute phase may indicate a tendency to utilize avoidant coping mechanisms. If an individual presents with marked substance abuse in the acute phase, it is may be wiser to delay exposure-based therapy for some time. The prob.lems arising from increased substance abuse may outweigh the benefits of exposure (see Naajavits, Chapter 10, this volume). Depression and Suicide Risk Individuals who are considered a suicide risk in the acute phase require sup.port, containment, and possibly antidepressant medication or hospitaliza.tion. The risk of providing suicidal individuals with exposure is that it may enhance their attention toward the negative aspects of their experience. There is considerable evidence that depressed people have poor retrieval of specific positive memories (Williams, 1996), so depressed individuals may have difficulty reinterpreting their traumatic memories following exposure. In contrast, they may focus on pessimistic views of their trauma and engage in ruminative thoughts that can compound suicidal ideation. These possibili.ties indicate that depression and suicide should first be managed in seriously suicidal people; acute stress reactions can be addressed after these immedi.ate problems are contained. Ongoing Stressors Many trauma survivors experience marked stressors in the initial period after trauma exposure. Severe pain, surgery, financial loss, criminal investi.gations, property loss, interpersonal breakdown, and media attention are some of the stressors that may make further demands on the acutely trauma.tized individual. Providing active therapy can represent an additional burden and compound the adjustment difficulties of some individuals in the context of ongoing stressors. Moreover, these individuals may not have sufficient resources to allocate to therapy if they have other excessive demands on them. For example, a burn patient who is attempting to cope with the severe pain of daily debridements and physiotherapy may require psychological support to assist him of her through these procedures. Attempting exposure may burden this patient with additional distress at a time when he or she requires all available energy for managing his or her medical condition. It is important to note that there are important limitations to the cur.rent evidence for the effective use of CBT shortly after trauma exposure. First, although CBT does lead to significant reductions in recently trauma.tized people who complete treatment, a significant proportion of partici.pants do drop out of treatment. For example, 20% of participants dropped out of both the Bryant et al. (1999) and Bryant et al. (2005) studies. That is, intent-to-treat analyses in these studies indicate modest benefits of CBT (Bryant et al., 1999, in press). This pattern clearly points to the need for interventions that are efficacious and manageable for more recently trauma.tized people. For example, providing nonexposure-based therapies (such as cognitive therapy) may be better tolerated by some patients. Alternately, teaching coping skills prior to exposure may help some patients cope with the exposure more effectively (Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, Han, 2002). Second, most early intervention treatment studies for ASD have emerged from a handful of treatment centers, and there is a need for replication across sites to validate the generalizability of these findings. The available studies have also been conducted with survivors of assault or accident; we currently have no data pertaining to the utility of CBT approaches applied shortly after mass violence, disaster, or terrorism. Third, we have no evidence indicating that early provision of CBT is actually superior to later provision of CBT. There is evidence that CBT provided approximately 4 months posttrauma is beneficial (Ehlers et al., 2003; Öst, Paunovic, & Gillow, 2002). Moreover, there is overwhelming evidence of the efficacy of CBT for chronic PTSD (for reviews, see Foa & Meadows, 1997; Harvey et al., 2003). It has yet to be dem.onstrated that there are tangible benefits in providing CBT shortly after trau.ma exposure, apart from the obvious benefit of reducing distress sooner rather than later. COMPONENTS OF CBT FOR ASD Education Therapy commences with education about stress reactions and the rationale for treatment, including a discussion of the specific treatment strategies. The aims of this education are to give the patient a framework in which they can understand their current symptoms, develop some mastery over their reac.tions, and acquire the foundations for participating in CBT. It is important to illustrate each point with examples from the individual’s own experience. After explaining the rationale of treatment to the patient, it is useful to ask the patient to explain his or her understanding of the problematic response and why he or she thinks treatment may work. This exercise encourages the individual to process the information that has been provided and gives the therapist an opportunity to correct any misunderstandings that the patient may have. Anxiety Management Skills It can be useful to provide anxiety management strategies early in therapy because (1) they can give patients a degree of control over their distress, and (2) these techniques are relatively simple to use. Be aware that most patients experience considerable distress during the initial sessions because they are confronting and expressing upsetting memories. The utility of reducing arousal in the acute posttrauma phase is also indicated by evidence that acute arousal is associated with chronic PTSD (Shalev et al., 1998). Giving the patient some tools to assist mastery over the acute anxiety can provide both a sense of relief and a motivation to comply with more demanding ther.apy tasks. Anxiety management often involves progressive muscle relaxation (Öst, 1987) and breathing retraining, which aims to achieve 10 breaths a minute. Although these techniques are simple, therapists need to be aware that focusing on bodily sensation or on breathing can trigger reminders of the trauma. First, individuals who experienced panic, suffocation, or choking need to be approached with caution because muscle relaxation or breathing exercises can elicit flashbacks. Second, requesting recently traumatized peo.ple to close their eyes can be a threatening experience if they have concerns about losing control. Therefore, it may be better to conduct these exercises with eyes open. Cognitive Therapy Cognitive therapy is based on the notion that emotional dysfunction results from maladaptive or catastrophic interpretations of events (Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979). The relevance of cognitive therapy to ASD and PTSD is underscored by increasing evidence that catastrophic thoughts in the acute phase are predictive of subsequent PTSD (Ehlers et al., 1998b; Engelhard et al., 2002). Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter to provide an ade.quate outline of cognitive therapy (see Beck et al., 1979), it is important to note several points in relation to providing cognitive therapy to individuals with ASD. First, it can be useful to provide cognitive therapy prior to employing exposure because it can be difficult to learn the cognitive therapy techniques if an individual is overly distressed by focusing on traumatic memories. Sec.ond, many beliefs that acutely traumatized patients report are based on recent and threatening experiences. Accordingly, their beliefs that they are not safe or that the world is inherently dangerous appear valid to them in the context of their recent trauma. Therapists need to emphasize to these indi.viduals that their beliefs are understandable in the aftermath of their recent trauma, although they may be modified with consideration of other evi.dence. Third, it is important to recognize that cognitive therapy is not posi.tive thinking. Whereas therapists should encourage individuals to consider alternative explanations in the light of all available evidence, there is a need to acknowledge that negative events can still persist following trauma. This approach is particularly important when treating people who are at high risk for ongoing trauma, including military personnel, police officers, firefighters, and paramedics. Fourth, clinicians should note that teaching cognitive therapy in the acute phase commences a learning process that will continue for months (hopefully) after therapy is complete. Therapists should not expect recently traumatized individuals to alter beliefs rapidly or easily, because the level of threat they may have experienced could be severe, and a period of time is often required for these individuals to learn through expe.rience that their immediate beliefs are not evidence-based. Below is an exam.ple of cognitive therapy with a patient who has ASD. THERAPIST: You mentioned that you feel that you can never feel safe again. How strongly do you feel this? PATIENT: I know that for a fact. I will never feel safe again. THERAPIST: OK. On a scale of 0–100, how sure are you of that? PATIENT: Very sure. I’d say about 90. THERAPIST: OK, now I wonder if you can tell me about other times in your life when you’ve felt strongly about something. What has happened to that feeling? Tell me about some of the worst things that have hap.pened to you. PATIENT: Well, about 4 years ago my mother died. That was pretty tough. We were close. THERAPIST: How did you feel at the time? PATIENT: Really bad. My life fell apart. THERAPIST: At the time did you feel you would get over it? PATIENT: Not at the beginning. It got better after a while. THERAPIST: What other bad things have happened to you? PATIENT: A friend of mime killed herself a few years ago. That was really bad. THERAPIST: When you think back to these things, do you still feel as bad today about those losses as you did when they happened? PATIENT: No. Things got better eventually. THERAPIST: Have you ever had feelings about anything that have stayed as strong as they were initially? PATIENT: Well, I guess if you put it that way, everything changes eventually. THERAPIST: What about that feeling that you can’t feel safe? Do you really feel that there is no place where you feel safe? PATIENT: None. THERAPIST: So you don’t feel safe here right now? PATIENT: No, that’s different. I know you are not going to hurt me. THERAPIST: So you do feel safe here? What about when you are with your wife at home? PATIENT: No, I am safe there. Home is OK. THERAPIST: OK. Now I want you to consider these points. You’re saying that you feel safe here, and you fee safe at home. You are also saying that you realize that even strong feelings that you’ve had in the past usually change after a while. I want you to hold all those thoughts in your mind for a minute and then think again about how strongly you believe that you will never feel safe again. How strongly do you feel that on a scale of 0–100? PATIENT: I guess it’s only about 50. THERAPIST: Why only 50? PATIENT: When you point out that other stuff, I guess I’ll probably feel better soon. THERAPIST: The major point to note here is that when you let your mind accept all the evidence available, you can often come to a conclusion that is different from the one you often think of automatically. I don’t expect you to really believe this right now. The real point is that the more you can think of all the evidence, the more you’ll start to believe these more realistic conclusions. And they will probably help you feel a bit better. The belief that you will never feel safe leaves you feeling rather helpless about things. I think we need to start working on the evidence that you can feel better in the future, but it’s probably a bit soon to expect yourself to be feeling great. Remember, it’s only been a few weeks since you were assaulted. In this excerpt the therapist does not insist that the patient alter his belief about his likelihood for change. The goal of the interaction is to (1) teach the patient the basic rationale of cognitive therapy, and (2) to assist him in recognizing that there is evidence that he can change how he feels—or that how he feels changes somehow. It may be premature to try to alter fun.damental beliefs about feeling safe at this point. Instead, commencing cogni.tive therapy discussions about changes in feelings of safety is more likely to be successful and allow the patient to work within a cognitive therapy frame.work for some time before addressing more central issues. Prolonged Exposure Prolonged imaginal exposure requires the individual to vividly imagine the trauma for prolonged periods in a way that emphasizes all relevant details, including sensory cues and affective responses. To achieve this victimization, the patient is often asked to provide the narrative in the present tense, speak in the first person, and focus on the most distressing aspects. Prolonged exposure typically occurs for at least 50 minutes and is usually supplemented by daily homework exercises. Variants of imaginal exposure involve requir.ing patients to write down detailed descriptions of the experience repeatedly (Resick & Schnicke, 1993) and implementing exposure with the assistance of virtual reality paradigms produced via computer-generated imagery (Rothbaum, Hodges, Ready, Graap, & Alarcon, 2001). Most imaginal expo.sure treatments supplement this exercise with in vivo exposure that involves live graded exposure to the feared trauma-related stimuli. There is much debate concerning the change mechanisms operating in exposure; proposed mechanisms include habitation of anxiety, correction of the belief that avoid.ance is required to control anxiety, incorporation of corrective information, and self-mastery (Jaycox & Foa, 1996; Rothbaum & Mellman, 2001; Rothbaum & Schwartz, 2002). In general, exposure for ASD utilizes the same exposure protocols as those described for chronic PTSD (see Riggs, Cahill, & Foa, Chapter 4, this volume; Foa & Rothbaum, 1997). The first stage in considering exposure is determining the patient’s suitability for this procedure. As mentioned above in the context of assessment, caution should be exercised in providing expo.sure to any recently traumatized individual who displays signs of being at risk for an adverse reaction to the distress that will be elicited by exposure. When commencing exposure, some patients will skip over the most distressing aspects of the experience because they cannot tolerate the affective response. This self-editing can be permitted initially, but it is important that as therapy proceeds, these “hot spots” receive close attention. Once a patient demonstrates in therapy that he or she can tolerate the exposure, daily homework exercises should be initiated. It is also especially useful to inte.grate cognitive therapy immediately after each exposure exercise, because there is typically much cognitive material elicited during exposure that can be addressed in cognitive therapy. In vivo exposure should be implemented in parallel with, or soon after, other treatment components. The initial step in in vivo exposure is to develop a hierarchy of feared or avoided situations. This procedure involves having the patient determine a graded series of situations that elicit varying degrees of anxiety. After the hierarchy is complete, the therapist should ask the patient to commence with the situation that is lowest on the hierarchy. It is advisable to start with a situation in which the patient can cope relatively easily to facilitate confidence in his or her ability and enhance compliance with more demanding items. It is useful to require the patient to remain in the situation until his or her distress has reduced by 50%. Once a situation is mastered, the therapist then requires the patient to undertake the next step on the hierarchy. In the acute phase, it is important to recognize that many avoidance behaviors are understandable and do not necessarily reflect mal.adaptive avoidance. For example, a man who was the victim of a home inva.sion was reluctant to return to his house several weeks posttrauma because his home was still stained with blood from the vicious attack. In a case such as this, it is reasonable to allow a degree of avoidance. Overall, it is useful to check that the person is engaging fully with the exposure to the feared stimu.lus and not engaging in safety behaviors that may minimize distress. For example, an assault victim may agree to remain in the shopping mall where the attack took place, but will carry a knife in his pocket as a means of pro.tection. Such safety behaviors serve to minimize full exposure to the situa.tion and should be removed from the exposure exercise. SUMMARY Treating ASD has significant benefits because it can limit posttraumatic stress reactions that can otherwise lead to a debilitating and long-term disor.der. It should be noted, however, that early intervention should not be offered to all recent trauma survivors who are distressed. Available evidence suggests that treatment effects are comparable when we treat people in the initial month after trauma or several years later. Accordingly, clinicians should not assume that early intervention is an imperative. Indeed, in cases of mass violence or disaster, it is often impossible to allocate sufficient resources in the initial month to provide therapy to hundreds or thousands of trauma survivors. In these situations it is important to ensure that all high-risk people are identified and therapy provided within a reasonable period of time. Although our evidence for early intervention is growing, we require further research to develop better evidence-based approaches that can be utilized by a broader array of acutely traumatized people. In the context of terrorism, war, and natural disasters, developing strategies that can be deliv.ered to many people who require it remains one of our highest priorities. REFERENCES American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Rose, S., & Kirk, M. (2000). Predicting PTSD in victims of 