CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Bringing Cognitive-Behavioral Psychology to Bear on Early Intervention with Trauma Survivors Accident, Assault, War, Disaster, Mass Violence, and Terrorism Josef I. Ruzek Increasing recognition of the potential impact of trauma exposure, coupled with humanitarian concern about responding to victims, has led to wide.spread implementation of trauma-related services in recent years. In particu.lar, interest in working with trauma survivors in the first weeks and months following their traumatic experiences has grown, with goals that include reducing acute distress, limiting suffering, maintaining functioning, and reducing rates of chronic problems. Several systems of early posttrauma intervention have evolved, relatively independently, to serve survivors of diverse traumas, including physical and sexual assault, natural and techno.logical disaster, terrorism and mass violence, war, and the exposure to life threat, human suffering, and loss often associated with emergency response work and peacekeeping operations. Scrutiny of existing early intervention efforts has increased as the field of traumatic stress studies has developed, and has gained greater urgency due to recent terrorist attacks (e.g., Septem.ber 11, 2001), the Iraq war, and widespread ethnic conflicts. In parallel with an increasing availability of posttrauma services, researchers are beginning to test the efficacy and effectiveness of existing interventions and to design and test new ones. In this context, studying cognitive-behavioral interven.tions designed to reduce problems associated with traumatic stress has become of increased importance. 433 In this chapter I look at the trauma resulting from these sources in order to (1) describe the potential for cognitive-behavioral psychology to inform the efforts to help survivors in established domains of post-trauma care; (2) explore the implications of cognitive-behavioral theory and research in relation to the goals and practices embodied in conventional early inter.vention efforts; (3) outline several key issues that must be confronted during the development of new approaches; and (4) draw attention to the need to plan, at the outset in hwat is a developing field, for the dissemination of new concepts and methods to the real-world settings where professionals work with trauma survivors. DOMAINS OF EARLY POSTTRAUMA CARE Established domains of early trauma care include efforts to serve individuals seeking emergency medical care (e.g., as a result of motor vehicle accidents or violent assault), survivors of disaster and terrorist attacks, survivors of sex.ual assault, and those traumatized during military deployment (e.g., combat, peacekeeping). In the past, cognitive-behavioral theory and intervention methods have had relatively little impact on development of these response services. More recently, however, cognitive-behavioral practitioners have become increasingly active in these settings, cognitive-behavioral interven.tions are being applied, and demonstration projects are being developed and evaluated. Hospital Trauma Care: Accident and Assault Survivors A primary environment for the early application of cognitive-behavioral interventions is the hospital, where a major opportunity to reach trauma sur.vivors soon after their traumatic experience can be found (Ruzek & Cordova, 2003). Very large numbers of individuals who have experienced life-threatening motor vehicle and industrial accidents, physical and sexual assaults, unexpected losses of loved ones, and traumatic life-threatening ill.ness present in hospital trauma centers and other medical settings. Also, in circumstances of mass violence and disasters that affect larger numbers of people, hospitals constitute a primary element of community response (Ruzek, Young, Cordova, & Flynn, 2004). To date, hospitals do not routinely provide preventive services that address the mental health consequences of traumatic events. At the present time, the best-developed cognitive-behavioral approach to secondary prevention of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been applied and tested with accident and assault survivors. Foa, Hearst-Ikeda, and Perry (1995) delivered a four-session intervention that used, in abbrevi.ated form, the same helping procedures—education, breathing/relaxation, training, imaginal and in vivo exposure, and cognitive restructuring—that have been used successfully in the treatment of chronic PTSD to help female victims of sexual and nonsexual assault. Subjects were assessed within 3 weeks of the assault, and treatment was begun immediately following assess.ment. Compared with a matched control group, individuals receiving the cognitive-behavioral intervention were significantly less depressed and reported fewer reexperiencing symptoms 5 months postassault. None of the treated participants showed depression or more than six PTSD symptoms; 56% of the control group reported moderate-to-severe depression, and 33% had more than six PTSD symptoms. Bryant and colleagues developed and validated a procedurally similar four-to-five session cognitive-behavioral approach to intervention with acci.dent and nonsexual assault survivors diagnosed with acute stress disorder. In two randomized controlled trials (Bryant, Harvey, Dang, Sackville, & Basten, 1998; Bryant, Sackville, Dang, Moulds, & Guthrie, 1999), this approach has been shown to reduce posttraumatic stress symptoms and prevent develop.ment of PTSD (see Bryant, Chapter 9, this volume, for a more detailed account of this work). Furthermore, Bryant, Moulds, and Nixon (2003) reported that, four years after being helped, participants who had received the intervention showed a lower intensity of PTSD symptoms than those receiving education and support. Demonstration projects have shown the feasibility of mounting traumat.ic stress services that include similar interventions in emergency medical set.tings (e.g., Shepherd & Bisson, 2004). Bisson, Shepherd, Joy, Probert, and Newcombe (2004) examined an intervention similar to that employed by Bryant with patients who attended an accident and emergency department following a physical injury that resulted in psychological distress. Patients receiving the cognitive-behavioral intervention showed significantly greater decrease in PTSD symptoms at 13-month follow-up, but did not differ on measures of anxiety or depression. Symptoms in both groups decreased sig.nificantly over time. It is notable that this study differed from those of Bryant in several respects. Bryant and colleagues intervened with individuals diagnosed with acute stress disorder, whereas this study focused on those with high initial levels of posttraumatic stress symptoms. The intervention procedure was similar but was somewhat less intensive (i.e., four hour-long sessions compared with four-to-five 1.5 hour sessions), and it was initiated later after a greater lapse of time from the traumatic event (5–10 weeks after injury, as opposed to approximately 2 weeks). The treatment providers may also have been less experienced with the intervention methods. Zatzick and colleagues have developed and tested a model of stepped collaborative care for acutely injured trauma survivors (Zatzick et al., 2001b). Collaborative care aims to integrate mental health care into general medical care, and here consisted of ongoing postinjury case management, motiva.tional interviewing targeted at alcohol abuse or dependence, and evidence-based pharmacotherapy or cognitive-behavioral therapy for those with PTSD at the 3-month period. Zatzick et al. (2004) recruited injured surgical inpa.tients who indicated clinically significant levels of posttraumatic stress symp.toms or depression. Compared with a usual care control, patients who received the collaborative care intervention showed significantly less alcohol abuse/dependence at 6 and 12 months after the injury. At 12-month follow.up, a significantly lower percentage receiving collaborative care met criteria for PTSD. Collaborative care patients showed little change in PTSD symp.toms over the year, whereas usual care patients showed significant worsen.ing. The authors speculated that the relatively weak impact on PTSD may have been due to the fact that some patients with minimal PTSD symptoms were recruited into the study. Importantly, cognitive-behavioral methods were integrated into this effort, modeled after those developed by Bryant and colleagues to treat persons diagnosed with PTSD (Wagner, 2003). Early evaluation and supportive care were not associated with a reduction in PTSD, which was only observed at the 3-month period when pharmaco.therapy or cognitive-behavioral treatments were implemented. A different cognitive-behavioral intervention embedded in emergency medical care was described by Cordova, Ruzek, Benoit, and Brunet (2003). This one-or two-session intervention is delivered by hospital personnel to both the patient and a significant other. The approach includes elements of coping skills training and motivational interviewing and targets communica.tion between the patient and significant other, aiming to facilitate support, promote disclosure by the patient, reduce disclosure-constraining behavior by the other, and improve coping. Although work on early delivery of cognitive-behavioral interventions to accident and assault survivors is promising, the Bisson et al. (2004) and Zatzick et al. (2004) findings highlight the need for delineation of the condi.tions under which the interventions may be effective as well as replication in multiple laboratories. Mental Health Response to Terrorism and Disaster As disaster response systems have matured, they have increasingly included explicit attention to the mental health consequences of exposure to natural and technological disaster and terrorist attack. This development has acceler.ated as a result of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 and heightened concern about future attacks. Historically, disaster mental health response has not included services explicitly informed by a cognitive-behavioral per.spective. This state is now beginning to change (e.g., Walser et al., 2004), driven by increased interest in delivery of evidence-based interventions on the part of organizations charged with disaster mental health response (Gib.son et al., in press). An important initial demonstration of the utility of cognitive-behavioral treatment for those with PTSD associated with terrorist attack and disaster was provided in efforts to help survivors of a 1998 terrorist bombing in Omagh, Northern Ireland. Gillespie, Duffy, Hackmann, and Clark (2002) conducted an open trial of a cognitive-behavioral therapy delivered between 1 and 34 months (median 10 months) postattack with survivors who had developed PTSD. Ninety-one patients who met criteria for PTSD resulting from the bombing received 2–78 sessions (with a mean of 8) of a treatment that combined imaginal exposure with cognitive therapy; 37% of survivors were treated in five or less sessions. Seventy-eight patients demonstrated sig.nificant pre–post improvement on standardized measures of symptoms, with an effect size for improvement in PTSD symptoms of 2.47, a magnitude of change comparable to, or larger than, controlled trials of cognitive-behavior.al therapy for PTSD. The terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon set into motion a number of initiatives to apply cognitive-behavioral methods of care for survivors (Neria, Suh, & Marshall, 2003; Levitt, Davis, Martin, & Cloitre, 2003). A cognitive-behavioral intervention (Hamblen et al., 2003) was deliv.ered to some survivors of the World Trade Center attacks, beginning approximately 18 months after 9/11, as part of an “enhanced” service offered under the auspices of Project Liberty crisis counseling programs. Comprised of psychoeducation, coping skills training, and cognitive restruc.turing, the treatment was delivered in 9–12 sessions to users of crisis coun.seling services who had screened positive on a paper-and-pencil selection tool. Clinicians reported that this intervention was well received by clients (Norris et al., in press), but no formal outcome assessment has been con.ducted, to date. Cognitive-behavioral interventions have also been delivered to emergency workers who responded to the 9/11 attacks (Difede, Roberts, Jayasinghe, & Leck, in press). Fear of terrorism often is the fear of traumatic events that may happen in the future; thus, a cognitive-behavioral approach has been tested that helps those who fear potential attacks. Somer, Tamir, Maguen, and Litz (2005) found that a 15-minute cognitive-behavioral telephone-administered anxiety management intervention was more effective than standard hotline counseling in reducing distress, anxiety, and worry about missile attack among Israeli citizens (see below). Rape Crisis Services Rape crisis centers are now established in many communities and provide a range of services, including telephone hotline counseling, hospital-based sex.ual assault nurse examiner programs (that link with individuals in the hospi.tal setting where they come immediately following the assault), individual counseling, and group support. Although these services have largely not been informed by research in cognitive-behavioral psychology, cognitive-behavioral perspectives may have much to offer in these contexts. As noted above, the possibility that PTSD can be prevented was signaled by cognitive-behavioral work with survivors of sexual assault (Foa et al., 1995). More gen.erally, cognitive-behavioral treatments set the standard for evidence-based care for individuals with rape-related PTSD (for detailed accounts of these treatments, see Riggs, Cahill, Foa, Chapter 4, this volume, and Shipherd, Street, & Resick, Chapter 5, this volume). Foa and colleagues (Foa, Cahill, & Hembree, 2001) demonstrated that exposure therapy for PTSD, shown to be effective in efficacy trials, could be similarly effective when delivered by rape crisis counselors who received systematic training and supervision. In a rather different demonstration, Resnick, Acierno, Holmes, Kilpat.rick, and Jager (1999) showed that simple education, informed by a cogni.tive-behavioral conceptual framework, is capable of producing some impor.tant benefits for sexual assault survivors. They showed a 17-minute educational videotape to women survivors of recent assault, to prepare them for forensic rape examinations. The video, which included information about and modeling of examination procedures, advice about ways of engag.ing in self-exposure to rape-related cues, information about cognitive and physiological reactions to rape, and ways of managing mood, resulted in sig.nificant decreases in postexamination distress ratings and anxiety symptoms. The Military For much of the 20th century, there have been efforts to reduce emotional breakdown during combat, to prevent decreased troop capability. These approaches are variously known as “frontline psychiatry,” “combat and oper.ational stress control,” and so on. They emphasize the need to deliver ser.vices as close as possible to the front lines, as soon as possible after traumatization, in the context of a strong expectation that personnel will be able to return to functioning and their military role; and that this will take place as simply as possible—hence the well-known acronym PIES (proximity, immediacy, expectancy, simplicity). A recent report provided some support for the impact of these principles (Solomon, Shklar, & Mikulincer, 2004). Because there have been few methodologically sound studies of the impact of these services, however, the evidence as a whole does not demonstrate, at present, their utility in preventing mental health problems (Jones & Wessely, 2003). Although these efforts have developed largely independent of cognitive-behavioral psychology, combat stress control and, more generally, Depart.ment of Defense (DoD) mental health care are beginning to include prac.tices that have been informed by cognitive-behavioral intervention methods. For example, the U.S. Army Combat Stress Control Handbook (Department of the Army, 2003) includes reference to stress-control methods such as abdom.inal breathing, visual imagery relaxation techniques, positive self-talk, and progressive muscular relaxation. The recently constructed and approved joint VA–DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Traumatic Stress (VA–Department of Defense Clinical Practice Guideline Working Group, 2003) includes significant reference to cognitive-behavioral practices. Some military mental health providers, searching for effective ways of intervening with affected personnel returning from the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars, have been delivering cognitive-behavioral treatments for PTSD (e.g., cognitive processing therapy; Resick & Schnicke, 1993), and cognitive-behavioral treat.ments figure prominently in the Iraq War Clinician Guide designed to help prepare the Veterans Administration Health Care System for returning ser.vice men and women (Ruzek et al., 2003). Comment Broad concern about the effectiveness of early posttrauma services and a desire to move toward evidence-based care are leading to increased adapta.tion of cognitive-behavioral interventions with varying populations of trauma survivors. As is evident above, most such adaptation is in its infancy. Cogni.tive-behavioral approaches to early intervention require conceptual develop.ment, practical formulation and “packaging,” and empirical study in a range of settings with varying trauma survivor populations. In the next section, components of cognitive-behavioral intervention that may be brought to bear are outlined. COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS: IMPLICATIONS FOR CURRENT PRACTICES IN EARLY INTERVENTION Cognitive-behavioral psychology includes an extensive array of behavior change principles and intervention methods that are relevant to the care of trauma survivors. To date, they have not been extensively adapted for early delivery to the major trauma populations and have not seen wide application within the delivery systems considered above. Because of the randomized controlled trials conducted by Bryant and colleagues as well as the larger body of evidence supporting cognitive-behavioral therapy as a treatment for chronic PTSD, there is much interest in early interventions based on cogni.tive-behavioral priciples. But the Bryant package has not yet been adequately replicated, and it is not clear how easily and effectively the approach can be generalized across types of trauma and delivery contexts. Bryant (Chapter 9, this volume) has described a range of circumstances in which the treatment may require modification or not be appropriate. There is also a widespread reluctance to employ exposure therapy methods soon after traumatization out of a concern, not yet systematically tested, that such methods may exac.erbate symptoms or be used ineffectively by inexperienced providers. But cognitive-behavioral early intervention should not be equated with this appli.cation, which represents one possible approach. In fact, early intervention incorporates a broad range of activities that have received relatively little attention by cognitive-behavioral psychologists but that require conceptual development, practical formulation, and empirical study. Survivor Education Education is a primary component of all efforts to provide early mental health response, including cognitive-behavioral interventions. It is provided via verbal interactions between helper and survivor, individually and in groups, and via written or media communications. It is intended to change beliefs by “normalizing” the experience of the survivor and making stress reactions seem more predictable and less frightening. It is intended to change behavior by instigating and reinforcing adaptive coping, reducing negative forms of coping (e.g., alcohol or drug use, social withdrawal, extreme emotional avoidance), and instructing survivors about when to seek additional counseling. Early trauma-related education is often provided in single contacts between survivor and practitioner, although evidence does not support the efficacy of single-session interventions with trauma survivors (Bisson, 2003). The limitations of brief information giving or verbal instruction are well known. Most of the methodology of behavior change relies on more inten.sive multisession interventions that harness known learning processes (e.g., reinforcement contingencies, classical conditioning, modeling). In fact, the utility of early educational activities in changing trauma-related beliefs and behaviors has received almost no research attention. The only study of a self-help manual treatment for PTSD was reported by Ehlers et al. (2003), who found that an educational manual was ineffective in reducing PTSD symp.toms, possibly because of difficulties in inducing self-managed exposure to feared situations. In studies reported by Bryant and colleagues, even multisession education and support were insufficient to significantly reduce risk of development of PTSD in accident and assault survivors diagnosed with acute stress disorder (e.g., Bryant et al., 1998, 1999). Despite the problems with simple instruction, there are reasons to con.tinue exploring the utility of brief advice in posttrauma situations. First, brief advice is easily disseminated and currently represents perhaps the primary means of reaching trauma survivors in some types of events (e.g., mass vio.lence). Second, it is possible that even if such approaches are relatively inef.fective in changing the behavior of significant percentages of those impacted by trauma, a brief intervention that helps only 5% of recipients might none.theless effect significant results if it could be delivered easily to thousands of people. Finally, if brief advice interventions are shown to be ineffective, then such a finding might precipitate a change in current practices to incorporate more robust behavior change methods. In some behavioral domains, however, research has suggested that brief advice may sometimes be as effective as more intensive interventions. For example, research on alcohol problems has shown that relatively brief treat.ments can reduce consumption (e.g., Moyer, Finney, Swearingen, & Vergun, 2002). This work is important in the context of traumatic stress because many trauma survivors have preexisting alcohol problems and/or increase their consumption to problem levels following traumatization. Some research does suggest that trauma survivors will respond to brief interven.tions targeting their drinking. Working with patients admitted to a hospital trauma center for treatment of injury, who screened positive for excessive alcohol use, Gentilello et al. (1999) demonstrated that a single 30-minute interview can reduce alcohol consumption in those with existing alcohol problems. Another study, of an intervention based on motivational enhance.ment (Miller & Rollnick, 1992), which addressed substance use problems in patients seeking emergency medical care, suggested that more than one con.tact may be important. Longabaugh et al. (2001) found that a 40-to 60-min.ute intervention, plus booster session, reduced consumption and was more effective in reducing alcohol-related negative consequences than standard care or a single-session intervention. In addition to these brief one-to-one interventions, it is possible that education to reduce consumption by trauma survivors can be supplied by media. Acierno, Resnick, Flood, and Holmes (2003) reported that their 17-minute educational video reduced likelihood of marijuana abuse at 6 weeks, and there was a trend for the video to be associ.ated with less alcohol abuse among women with a prior history of alcohol or marijuana use. In addition to indicating the potential of brief educational interven.tions, such studies also suggest that cognitive-behavioral methods may be used to increase their effectiveness. The Gentilello et al. (1999) intervention included individualized feedback about drinking habits, comparison to national norms, discussion of personal negative consequences of alcohol, consideration of a menu of strategies for change, and other motivational enhancement tools. Additional ways of magnifying the impact of brief advice include use of written self-help materials, instruction in self-monitoring activ.ities, telephone follow-up, and supplementing face-to-face care using Internet services. Normalization An important goal of early intervention, as practiced in most settings, is “normalization” of stress reactions. According to the thinking underlying this practice, negative interpretation of acute stress responses (e.g., “I’m going crazy,” “There’s something wrong with me,” “I must be weak”) may lead survivors to pathologize their own common responses and increase their anxiety associated with these reactions. There has been little effort to investigate this hypothesis, but an emphasis on reducing misinterpretation and fear of acute stress responses is consistent with some current theories of PTSD (e.g., Ehlers & Clark, 2003). It is also consistent with research that sug.gests that attributing dysfunctional meanings to posttraumatic intrusions is a determinant of PTSD severity (e.g., Steil & Ehlers, 2000) and findings of high levels of anxiety sensitivity among trauma survivors with PTSD (Taylor, 2003). At present, it is not clear whether individuals who interpret their acute stress reactions in negative ways will be at risk for posttrauma prob.lems or whether intervention can change those interpretations and thereby improve outcomes. In most posttrauma care, helpers try to normalize acute stress reactions by simply telling survivors that these are common, normal, and not dangerous. But among those at risk for development of PTSD, such simple instruction may be insufficient. Again, cognitive-behavioral methods might be used profitably to accomplish normalization; cognitive therapy methods might be used to address negative interpretations of reactions, breathing training methods might help reduce the intensity of hyperarousal symptoms or increase their controllability, and interoceptive exposure might be used to reduce fear of anxiety sensations. Ensuring Utilization of Services Concepts of normalization should also include normalization of help-seeking behavior, because research suggests that many individuals with significant levels of posttraumatic stress symptoms do not use mental health services, even when they are available. For example, following terrorist attacks, this nonutilization of services appears to be the case with direct survivors (Delisi et al., 2003), family members who lose loved ones (Smith, Kilpatrick, Falsetti, & Best, 2002), emergency workers (e.g., North et al., 2002), and medical staff (e.g., Luce & Firth-Cozens, 2002). Indeed, 3–6 months after the World Trade Center attacks in New York City, only 27% of those reporting severe psychi.atric symptoms had obtained mental health treatment (Delisi et al., 2003). This reluctance to use services may characterize many trauma populations. Hoge et al. (2004) found that only 23–40% of those recently returned from combat duty in Iraq or Afghanistan, who met screening criteria for a mental disorder (PTSD, major depression, or general anxiety), sought professional help, and only 38–45% indicated an interest in receiving help. Jaycox, Mar.shall, and Schell (2004) showed low use of mental health services despite high need among men injured through community violence. Weisaeth (2001) reported significant levels of nonacceptance of early intervention in industrial accident survivors. Identifying the reasons for reluctance to utilize available services requires more investigation, but we do know that many factors may contrib.ute. Lack of help-seeking behavior may sometimes reflect an awareness that some stress symptoms are to be expected, an acceptance of posttrauma dis.tress, and an intention to “get on with life” nonetheless. Some individuals who endorse high levels of PTSD symptoms may not label themselves as sig.nificantly distressed or disabled (Shalev, Tuval, Frenkiel, & Hadar, 2004). Other reasons may be more problematic. Families experiencing grief follow.ing the Lockerbie bombing reported thinking that they could handle it on their own, with help from family, friends, and their religious faith; that accessing mental health counseling would be a sign of weakness or stigma; that they could not afford it financially; or that they could not admit to hav.ing a problem (Smith et al., 2002). In the Hoge et al. (2004) study of Iraq or Afghanistan War returnees, concern about stigma as a result of seeking help was greatest among those most in need of help. Although most of those screening positive for a mental health problem acknowledged having a prob.lem (78%), many indicated that they “don’t trust mental health profession.als,” that “mental health care doesn’t work,” that they would be “seen as weak” if they sought help (65%), that participation in mental health services would harm their career, or that seeking help would be “too embarrassing” (41%). Difede et al. (in press) reported that, among emergency services work.ers who responded to the World Trade Center collapse, distress at trauma reminders was seen as a normal reaction to the events and not a reason to seek treatment. Rather, anger, irritability, and sleep problems were seen as reasons to seek help. Zatzick et al. (2001a) conducted an open-ended assess.ment of the concerns expressed by hospitalized survivors of motor vehicle accidents and assaults, who were most concerned with physical health (73%), psychological concerns (58%), work and financial issues (53%), social con.cerns (40%), and legal and medical concerns (10% each). Generally, a failure to assess and address the concerns of survivors will affect use of services and intervention compliance (Zatzick & Wagner, 2004). More research that sys.tematically explores the perspectives of the potential users of early interven.tion services is clearly needed. Pragmatic approaches to increasing the accessibility of services have been developed for various survivor populations, but these approaches have not been evaluated. Relatively little is known about how survivors make decisions about self-referral, how to encourage use of services, or how to increase the acceptance of referral for more intensive counseling. It is possible that a cognitive-behavioral framework might be usefully applied to these issues. For example, the motivational interviewing meth.ods (Miller & Rollnick, 1992) that have become widely accepted might be adapted to the contexts of disaster outreach (in which helpers make con.tact with survivors at places where they congregate, such as emergency shelters, shopping malls, on doorsteps, in workplaces, at religious gather.ings), and peer counseling programs, now very common in professions with expectable trauma exposure (e.g., police, military, emergency response). It may be especially important to regard environments in which recently traumatized individuals naturally present as “capture” sites that can be used to initiate processes that reduce the likelihood of disappear.ance from the system of care. Finally, in some trauma populations, development of posttrauma prob.lems may be associated with a dysfunctional withdrawal from family and other social interaction, increased irritability and anger, or increased use of alcohol or drugs. In such circumstances, trauma survivors may be unlikely to avail themselves of care opportunities at the same time that they create sig.nificant problems for those close to them. This pattern of behavior was com.monly observed among Vietnam veterans and may be a possible pattern among some returning Iraq or Afghanistan war veterans. One useful response may be to develop and test a cognitive-behavioral intervention simi.lar to that developed by Smith and Meyers (2004) that works with family members of substance abusers to increase likelihood of treatment entry. Return to Functional Roles and Reinforcing Activities One piece of coping advice that is often given to survivors of disaster/terror.ism is to, at the appropriate time, resume involvement in important personal work, school, and family roles. Similarly, combat and operational stress-con.trol doctrine emphasizes the importance of preventing military personnel from adopting a sick role and instead keeping them actively engaged in work activities. Wagner (2003) has described an ongoing project that uses a cogni.tive-behavioral approach to achieving similar goals. In this work, behavioral activation, a component of cognitive-behavioral treatments for depression, has been modified to be used in the prevention of PTSD and depression in injured trauma survivors. Behavioral activation includes a review of daily activities, identification of personal values and goals, selection of personally meaningful and enjoyable activities, and activity scheduling. It focuses on blocking avoidance and withdrawal in trauma survivors and increasing involvement in reinforcing activities. This approach to “guided activity” is supplemented with ongoing self-monitoring of the relationship between activity and mood. Factors related to avoidance are identified to initiate problem solving. Because behavioral activation is a relatively simple, time-limited intervention, it is conceptualized as an initial service in a stepped-care approach, such that those who do not improve can be referred for more intensive evidence-based treatments. Coping Support The recognition that most trauma survivors cope relatively well with trauma and do not develop PTSD or other problems has led those providing early care to seek to support the natural coping efforts of survivors. Helpers dis.cuss coping with survivors, encourage adaptive efforts, and seek to provide additional instrumental support. These actions are consistent with models that emphasize perceived coping self-efficacy (Benight & Bandura, in press). However, although coping styles have been found to be related to develop.ment of chronic PTSD, there has been little investigation of how survivors cope with acute stress reactions and the various other challenges of the early posttrauma period. That early interventions affect coping behaviors and that these behaviors are related to outcome have not been demonstrated. Skills training involves a set of systematic methods used by cognitive-behavioral practitioners to develop new repertoires of behavior in patients. There are many skills that might conceivably benefit survivors of recent trau.ma, including those related to problem solving, social support seeking and giving, assertion, and parenting. A prime example of a skills set relevant to survivors of recent trauma is that of anxiety management. Stress inoculation training has been found effective in treating people with chronic PTSD (Foa et al., 1999), and anxiety management skills (e.g., breathing retraining, relax.ation) are part of the intervention package used by Bryant and colleagues to successfully treat acute stress disorder. Although the addition of anxiety management training to exposure and cognitive therapy as an early treat.ment for acute stress disorder did not result in improved outcomes over and above the effects of cognitive therapy and exposure (Bryant et al., 1999), anx.iety management was not tested as an intervention in its own right in this study. Echeburua, de Corral, Sarasua, & Zubizarreta (1996) randomly assigned 20 treatment-seeking female survivors of recent (< 90 days) sexual assault to either a cognitive-behavioral package intervention or to progres.sive muscular relaxation training alone. Results indicated that both groups improved in global severity of PTSD and other areas (anxiety, depression, daily life functioning). In another demonstration of the utility of anxiety management skills, a single session of telephone-delivered anxiety management training was shown to decrease anxiety among Israeli citizens worried about the possibil.ity of a SCUD missile attack (Somer et al., 2005). When citizens called a hot-line due to SCUD-related distress, they were randomized to either cognitive-behavioral intervention or a standard hotline counseling (unconditional pos.itive regard, empathic listening, validation, social support) control group. The intervention lasted around 15 minutes and included normalization of stress responses, instruction in diaphragmatic breathing and cognitive restructuring, phone practice of the latter techniques, and assignments to practice at home. Compared with standard hotline practice, the experimen.tal intervention was associated with significantly less distress, anxiety, and worry about missile attack three days after the intervention. More research is needed to evaluate the impact of anxiety management skills training as an early posttrauma intervention, and also to establish the effects of training in skills for managing intense acute anxiety. For example, “grounding” tech.niques (e.g., Najavits, 2002) in which survivors are taught coping responses (e.g., washing face and hands, verbally describing their environment, feeling the chair on which they are sitting) that are intended to help them remain aware of their surroundings may reduce overwhelming anxiety, limit panic, and prevent dissociation. Such techniques should be examined to determine their impact on control of acute stress reactions. Social Support “Social support” is an umbrella term that is used to describe a multitude of helping activities (e.g., practical help with problems, emotional understand.ing and acceptance, normalization of reactions and experiences, mutual in.struction about coping). Perceived lack of social support posttrauma is a risk factor for PTSD (Brewin, Andrews, & Valentine, 2000), and negative reac.tions from others have been found to predict PTSD symptomatology among several groups of survivors, including those exposed to physical assault, sex.ual assault, and military peacekeeping duties (e.g., Zoellner, Foa, & Brigidi, 1999; Ullman & Filipas, 2001; Bolton, Glenn, Orsillo, Roemer, & Litz, 2003). Declines in social support among disaster survivors have been associated with declines in mental health (Norris et al., 2002). Little is known about naturally occurring support behaviors that take place during the first weeks and months following traumatization. Little is known, as well, about the impact of efforts to promote posttrauma social support on perceptions of support, actual support behaviors/interactions, or subsequent outcomes. The possibility exists that support can be influ.enced and that individuals may be trained to better support one another more effectively. The work of Lepore and colleagues (e.g., Lepore, Silver, Wortman, & Wayment, 1996) on the social constraints on disclosure—that the reactions of other persons may impede or “constrain” efforts to talk about a traumatic experience—suggests one direction for such intervention. Following this idea, Cordova et al. (2003) recently described the develop.ment of a one-or two-session cognitive-behavioral intervention that works with trauma survivors and a significant other to increase supportive commu.nication and disclosure and reduce constraints on disclosure within the dyad. Goals of the intervention include (1) to improve patient and family knowledge of the process of adjustment to stressful experiences, such as ill-ness/injury; (2) to increase tolerance for negative emotions (e.g., anxiety, fear, anger); (3) to increase rates of initiation of talking about the illness/ injury; and (4) to decrease social constraint behaviors (e.g., changing the sub.ject, criticizing, ignoring) by both patients and families in response to others’ disclosure of thoughts and feelings. Social support research suggests another important conceptual and practical dimension of early help for trauma survivors. Early interventions have focused largely on the individual trauma survivor. It may be useful, however, to conceptualize trauma as affecting a dyad or family group, and to encourage the development of interventions that target the evolving reac.tions among the group itself. Obviously, the family represents, for many sur.vivors, an important environment in which recovery must occur and which can be expected to affect the trajectory of that recovery in many ways. More.over, the traumatization of a family member is a family stressor that poten.tially has great impact on the well-being of the other family members. For more chronic posttrauma problems, cognitive-behavioral interventions focusing on parent–child (e.g., Deblinger, Thakkar-Kolar, & Ryan, Chapter 16, this volume) and adult couple dyads (Leonard, Follette, & Compton, Chapter 14, this volume; Monson, Schnurr, Guthrie, & Stevens, 2004) have been developed. Similarly conceived early interventions for trauma survivors require development. Assessment Most forms of help for trauma survivors involve some kind of assessment, and the assessment process itself may sometimes influence behavior. Assess.ment involves validation of concerns and may provide education about stress reactions, direct attention to reactions, reduce emotional avoidance, and so on. Some research with trauma survivors has suggested that assessment and self-monitoring may engender sustained reduction in PTSD symptoms in some trauma survivors (Tarrier, Sommerfield, Reynolds, & Pilgrim, 1999; Ehlers et al., 2003). Self-monitoring is, of course, a behavior change proce.dure that is used as a component of many cognitive-behavioral treatments. However, little is known about the effect of formal self-monitoring on acute traumatic stress reactions, coping responses, posttrauma alcohol consump.tion, or other trauma-related behaviors. Assessment also represents an opportunity for a helper to present the survivor with individualized feedback on his or her behavior and reactions. With regard to alcohol problems, assessment results are sometimes provided to the drinker as part of motivational enhancement to reduce drinking (Gentilello et al., 1999) or seek treatment. It is possible that such an exercise may also increase motivation to change trauma-related behaviors or accept referral for treatment. Group Interventions In many posttrauma environments, group-administered early intervention activities are a staple element of care. This is especially true when (1) large numbers of persons are exposed to the same traumatic event (e.g., terrorist attacks, industrial accidents, mass violence, community disasters), (2) preex.isting groups are exposed to trauma (e.g., a workplace exposed to a violent assault), and (3) workgroups are exposed to trauma as part of their job duties (e.g., military personnel, emergency response workers, police, forensic inves.tigators). Groups would appear to be well-suited to challenging common dis.tressing perceptions of survivors (e.g., feeling alone, different, misunder.stood by those around them), reducing social isolation, and providing social support and may also be useful in helping survivors address the worries asso.ciated with traumas that are particularly difficult to talk about with family and friends (e.g., sexual assault), due to perceived social stigma, embarrass.ment or shame, guilt, or fear of negative reactions from others. In the case of work-related trauma exposure, work groups can continue to function as a unit so that group interventions will potentially affect the ongoing recovery environment. Although little is known about the effectiveness of early group services in preventing PTSD and other trauma-related problems, we do know that group treatment is beneficial for those with chronic PTSD (Foy et al., 2000; Foy & Larsen, Chapter 15, this volume). The primary current model of early group intervention to reduce the impact of trauma is group stress debriefing (Raphael & Wilson, 2000). There are several variations of group debriefing, but in all, groups of persons affected by a common event are gathered together and led through a structured protocol intended to provide educa.tion to help normalize stress reactions, give advice about coping, facilitate the verbal sharing of experiences, mobilize mutual support, and give infor.mation about available services. Most debriefings start with a focus on factual information and move toward discussion of feelings associated with the trau.ma. Outcome studies have indicated that individual stress debriefing does not prevent development of PTSD, and these findings, together with a rela.tive absence of methodologically sound studies of group debriefing, have led to widespread questioning of the effectiveness of this procedure (e.g., McNally, Bryant, & Ehlers, 2003). From a cognitive-behavioral perspective, the lack of support for debriefing is not unexpected. Debriefing, like brief psychoeducation more generally, employs few powerful behavior change procedures, and relies instead on a one-time combination of simple advice and group discussion to change complex behaviors. Groups, however, will remain important in posttrauma care, albeit with a need to rethink their design. Debriefing remains a common practice at the current time, in part, because no viable alternative group interventions have been developed and tested. New cognitive-behavioral models of structured early interventions with groups that better harness effective change technol.ogies are required (e.g., skills training with instruction, practice, and coach.ing; modeling; self-monitoring or recording of key behaviors; use of task assignments). When verbal presentation of information is expanded to include opportunities to observe and practice coping behaviors, likelihood of behavior change may increase. Wherever possible, groups should involve multisession contact so that key messages can be repeated, supportive rela.tionships among members can be developed, skills can be learned, and recovery behaviors can be shaped and reinforced. ISSUES IN EARLY INTERVENTION Posttrauma Screening Fundamental to early posttrauma care are effective systems of matching sur.vivor to intervention. Most survivors will improve without help, and given resource constraints and concerns about “pathologization,” more formal interventions should be delivered only to those likely to need them. Screening and assessment to identify those at risk for chronic problems can, in principle, be used to help accomplish this objective. Wessely (2003) has argued that such screening should meet a variety of conditions, including the following: • Spontaneous recovery is unlikely. • Those who are screened would not have presented for care in the absence of screening efforts. • There is a proven intervention for those detected. • The anticipated benefits of screening outweigh the negative conse.quences. • Screening and treatment are acceptable to those screened. • A validated screening tool is available. • Evidence indicates that early treatment will lead to better outcomes than late treatment. At the current time, most of these conditions are not met. We are not yet able to identify with adequate precision those who will go on to develop sig.nificant problems. Bryant (2003) suggested that it may be premature to iden.tify individuals for intervention before 2 weeks posttrauma, that active cogni.tive-behavioral intervention should not be offered earlier than 2 weeks, and that survivors will need to deal with practical problems before seeking care. However, counselors may have more confidence in initiating intervention after a few months because remission rates decline with the passage of time. For example, motor vehicle accident survivors who continue to have PTSD at 6 months following their crash are relatively unlikely to remit without treat.ment (Blanchard & Hickling, 2004). More of Wessely’s conditions are met when screening is implemented after several months following the trauma; for example, validated screening tools and evidence-based treatment for PTSD are available. Screening for PTSD and other posttrauma difficulties is beginning to be used routinely for returning military personnel and has been tried as well in the context of disaster and hospital trauma care. Following the World Trade Center attacks in New York, Project Liberty created a range of services intended to help the community, and in its second year of operation, a paper-and-pencil screening tool was used to identify those who might benefit from a referral for more specialized cognitive-behavioral care. Also in New York, Difede et al. (in press) developed a screening program for emergency relief workers responding to the attacks. With regard to screening for exces.sive alcohol consumption, screening tools exist and brief interventions are effective, but there is a need to implement screening protocols more widely with recently traumatized persons. Selected Follow-Up with Survivors Some of the potential limitations of early screening efforts are no longer evi.dent if positive screens are used to initiate, routine telephone follow-up mon.itoring, not treatment, of survivors judged to be at elevated risk for continu.ing posttrauma problems (cf. Brewin, 2003). Screening can be used to identify those who should be monitored, not those who require early inter.vention. This process may be less likely to be associated with stigmatization, and those who do not wish to be followed up can simply deny permission. In the hospital trauma center, most victims of assault will indicate, if asked, an interest in receiving counseling (Roy-Byrne, Berliner, Russo, Zatzick, & Pitman, 2003) and are receptive to case management (Zatzick et al., 2004). Because individuals may be expected to differ in their receptivity to offers of counseling at different points in time, this approach may provide the survi.vor with multiple opportunities to seek services. Early Intervention Contexts Involving Continued Threat Interventions designed for the treatment of PTSD are almost always applied under conditions of relative safety, in which threat of continued harm is min.imal. In some environments (e.g., war zones, terrorist threat situations), how.ever, these conditions do not apply. Realistic threats of ongoing exposure to continued attacks may form part of the environment in which traumatic stress reactions must be managed. Shalev et al. (2003) described modifica.tions in delivery of cognitive-behavioral treatment for terrorism-related PTSD in Israel, designed to reflect these changed circumstances. During in vivo exposure assignments, survivors were encouraged to expose themselves to situations that were clearly safe, but not to those widely considered dan.gerous and avoided by most of the populace (e.g., city centers where repeated bombings had occurred). Their appropriate avoidance was charac.terized as “positive safety behaviors” and their goal as achieving “normal fear.” Cognitive therapy was applied to help the PTSD group modify their beliefs, but differences between cognitions underlying avoidance by the gen.eral population and those related to avoidance by those with PTSD were noted. The latter group was thinking, “If I go there will definitely be another attack, and this time I will definitely die,” whereas individuals without PTSD were thinking, “The risk is very small, but I really don’t need to go and buy a book—it is not worth the risk” (Shalev et al., 2003, p. 182). Cost-Effective Delivery In most posttrauma environments, resource limitations inhibit the delivery of individual assessment and intervention to all survivors who might benefit. This limitation is especially apparent in situations involving large numbers of affected persons (e.g., terrorist attacks, large-scale disaster). It is also true in countries or communities with few available mental health resources. But it is also a limitation in hospital emergency medicine, in which staffing levels do not encourage routine screening and brief intervention with those show.ing high levels of acute traumatic stress (Zatzick et al., 2000). Ways of delivering cost-effective cognitive-behavioral services require more development. One possibility is increased use of bibliotherapy. Written materials are routinely provided to trauma survivors, but their impact is not known. Certainly, cognitive-behavioral self-help interventions have been demonstrated to be effective for treatment of anxiety problems in a number of controlled treatment outcome studies (e.g., Lidren et al., 1994; Gould & Clum, 1995) and require more investigation with survivors of recent trauma. Telephone delivery represents another potential way of reaching early trauma survivors. In New York after the 9/11 attacks, a LifeNet hotline established as part of Project Liberty received heavy use; it provided 24-hour mental health counseling, information, and referral, offering assistance in multiple languages. A study by Gidron et al. (2001) reported on an innova.tive effort to use the telephone to intervene with motor vehicle accident sur.vivors soon after discharge from emergency room care. Survivors were called twice (24 and 48 hours following discharge), using either a two-session tele.phone-based memory structuring intervention (MSI) or a control interven.tion consisting of supportive listening by a counselor who also provided information about available treatment services. In the first session of MSI, the therapist listened to and clarified the details of the accident, repeated back the narrative in an organized manner, and then asked the survivor to do a subsequent retelling. As a between-session task, the patient was instructed to practice telling friends and family the structured account. In the second session with the therapist, the survivor was asked to once again disclose the details in a structured manner. Greater reductions in PTSD symptoms at 3-to 4-month follow-up were noted in the MSI group. And as noted earlier, the telephone has also been used to reduce anxiety levels among individuals fearing future terrorist attacks (Somer et al., 2005). Finally, the Internet represents a delivery system with significant poten.tial that has yet to be effectively harnessed to meet the needs of trauma survi.vors. Websites were a significant information resource after the terrorist attacks of 9/11. They have also been used to provide information to return.ing military personnel and their families, and to rape survivors. Hypothetical advantages of Internet-facilitated services include (1) an ability to reach large numbers of people in a cost-effective manner; (2) potential delivery in hospi.tal and home settings; (3) an ability to reach people who might not otherwise have any mental health contact (e.g., those affected by perceived stigma or concerned about confidentiality concerns; those unable to travel to face-to.face services due to distance, acute injury, ongoing environmental risk, or quarantine); and (4) an ability to place survivors in contact with one another to facilitate mutual aid and support. From a cognitive-behavioral perspective, Web-delivered care has significant potential, because it can include task assignments, self-monitoring, interactive individualized content, and skills in.struction such as modeling, personalized assessment, and feedback. There has been little systematic effort to use the Internet as a medium through which to help trauma survivors. A writing-based cognitive-behav.ioral protocol delivered to students over the Internet—“Interapy”—was asso.ciated with significantly lower intrusion and avoidance symptoms, lower general psychopathology scores, and more improvement in mood, com.pared to a waiting-list control, and gains were maintained or improved upon at a 6-week follow-up (Lange, van den Ven, Schrieken, & Emmelkamp, 2001). Lange et al. (2003) provided the 5-week Web-delivered writing treatment to a sample of Dutch Internet users with significant post-traumatic stress symptoms, and found greater reduction among treated subjects in PTSD symptoms, anxiety, depression, somatization, and sleep problems than among those assigned to a waiting-list control condition. These studies provide an early demonstration of the feasibility of deliver.ing Web-based interventions to traumatized populations. Litz, Williams, Wang, Bryant, and Engel (2004) have described a cognitive-behavioral ther.apist-assisted Internet-based self-help intervention designed to enable the treatment of large numbers of traumatized individuals, that uses a form of stress inoculation training for both secondary prevention of PTSD and treatment of the chronic disorder. Related to this issue of cost-effectiveness is a question about the “boundary conditions” of cognitive-behavioral interventions. The work of Bryant and colleagues together with research on treatment of patients with chronic PTSD suggests that cognitive therapy and exposure therapy meth.ods are effective in reducing traumatic stress symptomatology. However, in research studies these procedures are usually delivered by relatively expert, well-trained and supervised practitioners in ways that will maximize inter.vention impact (e.g., 5–12+ individual sessions). Although there have been some early demonstrations that indigenous helpers can deliver effective care for survivors who have developed PTSD as a result of terrorist attack (Gillespie et al., 2002; Levitt et al., 2003) or sexual assault (Foa et al., 2001), it is also important to determine the degree to which cognitive-behavioral interventions may be “degraded” and still affect outcome. Will abbreviated versions of interventions have measurable impact on behaviors of importance? My colleague and I (Prins & Ruzek, 1999) worked with rape crisis cen.ters to identify a means of applying principles derived from cognitive-behav.ioral evidence-based interventions in ways that would “fit” the existing rape crisis counseling service delivery context. We designed a set of “counseling tools” to be used by rape crisis counselors as appropriate to the situation. Although it may take 10–30 minutes to deliver all of the modular tools, pieces of any module can be “dropped into” the conversation, as needed. These mini-tools can be delivered in 2–5 minutes, even if the conversation is largely concerned with other matters. Examples of such brief tools include ways of explaining the relationship between beliefs and distress, identifying negative trauma-related beliefs and encouraging alternative beliefs, identify.ing sources of social support, assessing past disclosure experiences, and encouraging participation in follow-up (e.g., provide a rationale for partici.pating, make a plan for how this can happen). “Psychopathology” versus “Resilience” Perspectives It could be argued that much current thinking in the field of early interven.tion has been shaped by research grounded in concepts of posttrauma psy.chopathology. Research on development of PTSD informs secondary pre.vention efforts, and methods of intervention have been adapted from treatments designed to treat chronic PTSD. Bonanno (2004) has suggested that most research on coping with trauma has focused on treatment seekers and those experiencing psychological problems and argued that it is impor.tant to distinguished between “resilience” (characterized by low initial and continuing levels of trauma reactions) and “recovery,” in which individuals show PTSD or subclinical stress reactions that remit over the course of sev.eral months. In practice, those working with recent trauma survivors have been concerned to avoid defining acute stress reactions as abnormal or reflective of psychopathology. In most settings that provide services for com.bat stress, disaster mental health, and rape crisis, there is active avoidance of the language of “disorder” and little application of diagnostic labels, along with a corresponding effort to acknowledge the strength and resilience of survivors. Certainly, those showing Bonnano’s pattern of resilient response require more systematic study, and the implications of a resilience perspec.tive require more exploration. Such work might lead to different ideas about helping, as when Shalev and Ursano (2003) suggested conceptualizing the task of the helper as that of helping the survivor identify and manage obsta.cles to self-regulation. It is not yet clear how best to integrate the strengths of these somewhat different approaches to early trauma response. There is some concern that provision of “mental health” services or associated activities (e.g., screening for problems, education about mental health consequences of trauma) might have potential for worsening the outcome of some survivors, perhaps by increasing their expectancies of developing psychological symptoms or increasing their awareness of psychological distress (Rose, Bisson, & Wessely, 2003). Against this concern must be weighed the problems associ.ated with failing to ensure that individuals with clinically significant prob.lems require adequate, evidence-supported care. In some ways, cognitive-behavioral psychology is well placed to draw upon research into the etiology and treatment of PTSD and, at the same time, avoid some of the pitfalls of an emphasis on psychopathology. In addition to its strong theoretical and empirical grounding, cognitive-behavioral psychology has a tradition of view.ing problem behaviors as adaptive responses to the environment, emphasiz.ing the training of skills for coping with specific problem situations, viewing the client–therapist relationship as one of collaboration, and embracing a model of care in which therapists act as teachers and coaches for their cli.ents. These and other elements of the cognitive-behavioral orientation are good “fits” with the resilience perspective and with the environments in which recent trauma survivors may be offered support. DISSEMINATION Most mental health providers have not been trained in evidence-based treat.ments for PTSD and other trauma-related problems. Consequently, as cogni.tive-behavioral early interventions are developed, it will be a challenge to dis.seminate them to those who serve the various populations of trauma survivors, many of whom are volunteers, paraprofessionals, or professionals who are unfamiliar with cognitive-behavioral interventions. Recent evidence and experience does suggest, however, that mental health professionals can be rapidly trained in the delivery of these treatments. As noted previously, rape crisis counselors trained to deliver an evidence-based treatment for chronic PTSD (exposure therapy) demonstrated a clinical impact similar to that shown in efficacy trials (Foa et al., 2001). In their successful open trial of cognitive therapy with survivors of the 1998 Omagh terrorist bombing, Gillespie et al. (2002) provided an important initial demonstration of the fea.sibility of training indigenous mental health providers in evidence-based treatments for traumatic stress problems. Therapists were National Health Service mental health providers with no previous experience in treating trau.ma. Following 9/11, several efforts to train mental health providers in evi.dence-based treatments were undertaken. Neria et al. (2003) described their efforts to provide New York City trauma therapists with systematic training and supervision in prolonged exposure treatment for people with PTSD (Foa & Rothbaum, 1998). Training was initiated approximately 2 months after the attacks, and over a 12-month period, more than 500 local clinicians were trained. Levitt et al. (2003) reported on an effort to train community-based counselors to deliver the skills training in affective and interpersonal regulation/narrative trauma processing intervention (see Cloitre & Rosenberg, Chapter 13, this volume) to New York City survivors who were experiencing psychological distress as a result of 9/11 and reported some symptoms of PTSD (not necessarily fulfilling a diagnosis of PTSD). Treat.ment was provided 1 year after the attack and consisted of a mean of 18 indi.vidual sessions that targeted emotion management skills (e.g., self-monitor.ing, distress tolerance), interpersonal skills (e.g., communicating feelings with others, enlisting social support), and imaginal exposure. Seven provid.ers (including master’s level social workers and clinical psychologists) were trained in the intervention in a 2-day workshop, followed by weekly group supervision. Data indicated that the treatment was effective in reducing symptoms of PTSD and depression, hostility, interpersonal sensitivity, and use of alcohol/drugs to cope, and in improving overall social–occupational functioning; effect sizes were comparable to those obtained in an earlier effi.cacy study with child abuse survivors with PTSD (Cloitre, personal communi.cation, September 15, 2004). This work is especially significant for its demonstration that evidence.based treatments may be applied in flexible ways that allow providers to adapt treatments to their own delivery preferences and situational con.straints. Providers were permitted to “adjust the dose” by repeating protocol sessions, as needed, to eliminate sessions perceived as inappropriate, and to spend time attending to issues that were not the focus of the manualized intervention. In Israel, also in a terrorism context, Somer et al. (2005) dem.onstrated the feasibility of training paraprofessional hotline counselors in a telephone-administered anxiety reduction intervention via a single 5-hour training workshop. Planning for Dissemination Those engaged in development and testing of early intervention approaches might benefit from consideration of the exigencies of eventual dissemina.tion. Current community standards of care do not reflect the evidence from treatment outcome research in too many domains of behavioral problems. There are many reasons for this state of affairs, but it is possible that design of interventions might benefit from incorporating dissemination consider.ations early in the development process. Therapeutic interventions must be acceptable to the groups expected to use them. Too often, interventions are developed by psychologists and other researchers who then attempt to persuade established communities of providers to adopt their approaches. As an alternative, the intervention development process could include early collaboration partnerships with likely providers. This kind of teamwork would help ensure that interven.tions are designed in ways that can be easily integrated into existing struc.tures and repertoires. Further, these partners might facilitate eventual efforts to disseminate the methods to other similar settings. Collaborative design will be important if innovative services are to be adopted by the practitioners who must deliver them within prevailing cultures of care. In addition, helping approaches must be acceptable to another major con.sumer group: survivors and their families. And given the general reluc.tance to seek help, successful interventions will be ones that have been designed to be attractive to consumers by addressing their perceived needs and preferences. Another consideration that may affect rates of utilization by practition.ers is choice of intervention target. Much of the research related to posttrau.ma problems has a disorder-specific focus (e.g., PTSD), which may represent an impediment to adoption of methods. In fact, there are many appropriate, and sometimes necessary, targets of early posttrauma intervention, including posttraumatic stress reactions, alcohol and drug consumption, anxiety and panic, depression, family problems, and difficulties with returning to work or other functional roles. Often, these difficulties are co-occurring. For example, among traumatic injury survivors, 23% screened positive for high levels of posttraumatic stress reactions and/or depression and alcohol/stim.ulant intoxication at the time of hospital acute care admission (Zatzick et al., 2002). Methods of prevention of PTSD must be developed that are compati.ble with the need in most settings to also intervene with other psychosocial problems and to address interacting problem behaviors efficiently. Given the heterogeneity of presentations and multiple problems faced by survivors of recent trauma, Wagner (2003) has suggested that ways of promoting behav.ioral assessment/functional analysis leading to individualized case formula.tion should be explored. CONCLUSION Historically, there have been relatively few settings in which cognitive-behav.ioral practitioners and researchers worked with recent trauma survivors. This past reality is changing as cognitive-behavioral practitioners and scien.tists become more active in military mental health, rape crisis centers, hospi.tal behavioral medicine settings, and disaster relief settings, and as these set.tings become increasingly more concerned about the evidence base for their services. Very important in this regard is hospital emergency medicine. The fact that trauma centers and other hospital settings serve large numbers of trauma survivors contains several important implications. First, it is in such settings that methodologically strong outcome research can most readily be conducted. Second, the lack of existing services, coupled with increasing rec.ognition by medical staffs that their trauma patients will experience mental health difficulties, means that practitioners may be welcomed if they propose delivery of services to a population in need. Finally, these settings may serve as training environments for those who wish to develop skills in working with recent trauma survivors. The application of cognitive-behavioral perspectives to early posttrauma intervention has much to offer. The best supported psychosocial treatments for PTSD have emerged from cognitive-behavioral psychology, and many aspects of cognitive-behavioral intervention, including anxiety management, skills training, therapeutic exposure, cognitive therapy, functional assess.ment, self-monitoring, and goal setting, might be of value to patients in the first weeks and months posttrauma. Methods developed to change a variety of behaviors—to reduce alcohol and drug consumption, manage depression, reduce social anxiety, increase participation in rewarding activities, treat panic disorder, manage anger problems, improve assertion and conflict reso.lution, and manage pain, among others—may have useful application in the aftermath of trauma. Significant challenges include the development of cog.nitive-behavioral group-and family-administered early interventions, brief but effective forms of helping, and, in the context of multiple posttrauma problems, systems for matching survivors to brief cognitive-behavioral inter.ventions. 