CHAPTER ELEVEN Cognitive Therapy for Trauma-Related Guilt Edward S. Kubany Tyler C. Ralston There is considerable evidence that cognitions play an important role in the maintenance or chronicity of posttraumatic stress (e.g., Brewin, Dalgleish, & Joseph, 1996; Ehlers & Clark, 2000; Foa, Ehlers, Clark, Tolin, & Orsillo, 1999; Kubany et al., 1996; Kubany & Watson, 2002, 2003a). This research has emphasized survivors’ phenomenology, much of which involves guilt and shame (see Kubany, 1998, for a brief review). Research reviewed elsewhere shows that trauma-related guilt is a com.mon problem for survivors of many different kinds of traumatic events— including survivors of combat, physical and sexual abuse, technological disasters, and surviving family members of victims of accidents, suicide, homicide, and sudden illness (Kubany et al., 1995; Kubany & Manke, 1995). Our own research documents that trauma-related guilt is pervasive both within and across survivor groups (Kubany et al., 1996, 2000). In a mixed sample of treatment-and non-treatment-seeking Vietnam veterans, nearly two-thirds (65%) reported experiencing at least moderate guilt, and almost one-third (32%) reported guilt in the considerable-to-extreme range (Kubany et al., 1996). Among 168 women participating in support groups for battered women, almost half (49%) reported moderate or greater guilt related to their abuse (Kubany et al., 1996). Only six of these women had no abuse-related guilt. Among 212 physically and/or sexually abused women with diagnoses of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (based on structured interviews), 75% reported moderate or greater abuse-related guilt (Kubany, 2000). Guilt is positively and significantly related to the severity of PTSD. In three separate samples of Vietnam combat veterans, combat-related guilt was correlated between .67 and .81 with combat-related PTSD (Kubany, Abueg, 258 Kilauano, Manke, & Kaplan, 1997; Kubany et al., 1995, 1996). In a sample of 50 women in support groups for battered women, an index of partner-abuse.related guilt was correlated .51 with PTSD (Kubany et al., 1995). Similarly, in a sample of 68 women in support groups for battered women, the Global Guilt and Guilt Cognitions scales of the Trauma-Related Guilt Inventory (TRGI) were both correlated .55 with partner-abuse-related PTSD (Kubany et al., 1996). In our conceptualization of chronic PTSD, guilt-associated beliefs and guilt-associated language repertoires contribute significantly to the persis.tence or chronicity of trauma-related distress and depression (Kubany & Watson, 2002, 2003a). An important reason why memories of trauma may not lose their capacity to evoke emotional pain over time may be due to higher order language conditioning (Kubany & Watson, 2002)—whereby guilt-associated appraisals that have acquired the ability to evoke negative affect (e.g., “I never should have . . . I could have prevented it”)—function as conditioned language stimuli in pairings with images or thoughts of the trau.ma (Staats, 1972, 1996). Such appraisals may also control or lead to shame-related statements, such as, “There’s something wrong with me . . . so stupid . . . I’m a bad mother.” If habitually paired with recollections of trauma, such affect-evoking appraisals may repeatedly recondition memories of the trau.ma with distress. Affect-evoking cognitions of guilt may also function as a form of self-punishment that contributes to depression (e.g., Pitman et al., 1991), and tendencies to suppress or avoid trauma-related memories that evoke guilt may interfere, due to insufficient exposure duration, with the process of spontaneous recovery or natural extinction (Rohrbaugh, Riccio, & Arthur, 1972). A GUIDING CONCEPTUALIZATION OF GUILT We have conceptualized and obtained empirical support for guilt as a mul.tidimensional construct comprised of negative affect and four guilt-related beliefs or cognitions: (1) perceived responsibility, (2) perceived insufficient justification for actions taken, (3) perceived violation of values, and (4) per.ceived foreseeability and preventability of negative outcomes (which are often distorted by hindsight bias; Fischhoff, 1975; Kubany & Watson, 2003a). In a two-factor analysis of the TRGI, all negative affect items loaded on a Distress factor, and all cognitive items loaded on a Cognitions factor (Kubany et al., 1996). Guilt is defined phenomenologically as an unpleasant feeling accompanied by a belief (or beliefs) that one should have thought, felt, or acted differently (Kubany & Watson, 2003a). This definition has guided our theoretical work on guilt (e.g., Kubany & Watson, 2003b; Kubany et al., 1995), our guilt assessment research (e.g., Kubany et al., 1996), and our development of a cognitive therapy model, which is the topic of this chapter. Shame and Its Relationship with Guilt Many trauma survivors experience both guilt and shame (e.g., Dutton, 1992; Hogland & Nicholas, 1995; Lisak, 1994). Guilt and shame tend to be yoked in trauma, because when survivors implicate themselves as playing a signifi.cant role in a tragic, irreparable outcome, they are also prone to conclude that the outcome reflects on their entire self, personality, or character (Kubany & Watson, 2003b). For example, one woman concluded that she was “evil” and a “monster” because she believed there were things she “could have done” to prevent her mother’s death from cancer (Lindsay-Hartz et al., 1995, p. 277). As another example, Kubany and Watson (2005) cite a survi.vor of acquaintance rape who concluded that there was “something wrong with me” for not preventing the assault, in light of the fact that she, herself, was a sex abuse counselor and “should have seen the signs.” Thus, guilt and shame often seem to go together in the experience of trauma survivors because distress and guilt cognitions of high magnitude would often lead to shame cognitions and shame. It is important, though, to differentiate shame from guilt, precisely because shame is an emotional experience so closely associated with guilt and elicited by the same kinds of events or situations as guilt (Harder, 1995; Johnson et al., 1987; Tangney & Fischer, 1995). Perhaps the essential distinc.tion between guilt and shame is that guilt involves depreciation of specific actions or behaviors, whereas shame involves depreciation of the entire self (Barrett, 1995; Ferguson & Stegge, 1995; Harder, 1995; Lewis, 1971; Tangney, 1997). In line with this distinction, shame can be defined as an unpleasant feeling plus a negative evaluation of one’s entire self, personality, intelli.gence, or character (e.g., “I feel inadequate”; Kubany & Watson, 2003b; cf. Foa et al.’s [1999] construct of “negative cognition about the self”). Shame is associated with a negative evaluation about one’s entire self, whereas guilt is associated with a negative evaluation of one’s specific actions in specific situ.ations. ERRONEOUS THINKING AMONG TRAUMA SURVIVORS Because many trauma survivors exaggerate or distort the importance of their roles in traumatic events, they experience guilt and shame that have little or no rational basis (see Kubany & Manke, 1995). Kubany and Manke (1995) observed that trauma survivors tend to draw four kinds of faulty conclusions concerning their roles in the trauma, each of which involves distortion of a cognitive component of guilt. First, many survivors believe, in retrospect, that trauma-related outcomes were foreseeable, hence preventable; that is, they may believe falsely that they “knew” what was going to happen before it was possible to know, or that they dismissed or overlooked clues that “sig.naled” what was going to occur (foreseeability and preventability distortion). Sec.ond, many survivors accept an inordinate share of responsibility for causing the trauma or related negative outcomes (responsibility distortion). Third, many survivors believe that their trauma-related actions were less justified than would be concluded on the basis of an objective analysis of the facts (justification distortion). Fourth, many survivors believe they violated personal or moral convictions, even though their intentions and actions were consis.tent with their convictions (wrongdoing distortion). OVERVIEW OF COGNITIVE THERAPY FOR TRAUMA-RELATED GUILT The goal of cognitive therapy for trauma-related guilt (CT-TRG) is to help clients achieve an objective and accurate appraisal of their roles in trauma. CT-TRG focuses on correcting thinking errors that can lead trauma survi.vors to draw faulty conclusions about the importance of the roles they played in traumatic events. We have identified 18 such thinking errors, which are shown in Table 11.1 (Kubany, McCaig, & Laconsay, 2004b). There are three phases in CT-TRG: (1) assessment, (2) guilt incident debriefings, and (3) CT proper, which involves separate, semistructured pro.cedures for correcting thinking errors that lead to faulty conclusions associ.ated with guilt. The main procedures used in CT-TRG are briefly discussed below. These procedures are described and illustrated in greater detail else.where (Kubany, 1997, 1998; Kubany & Manke, 1995), and clinicians who are interested in using CT-TRG are encouraged to examine these other sources. Guilt Assessment Assessment is an integral part of the CT-TRG model. We use a structured interview and specially designed questionnaires (1) to identify idiosyncratic sources of trauma-related guilt, (2) to assess clients’ faulty thinking patterns, and (3) to evaluate treatment efficacy. Structured Guilt Assessment Interview We use a structured interview to identify important issues across five domains of guilt (Kubany & Manke, 1995). This interview (which also includes follow-up probes) consists of five core questions about the trauma that ask whether respondents feel guilty about (1) anything they did, (2) any.thing they did not do, (3) feelings they had, (4) feelings they did not have, and (5) thoughts or beliefs they had. For example, clients may be asked, “Do you feel guilty about anything you did related to the trauma? . . . Tell me about that.” TABLE 11.1. Thinking Errors That Lead to Faulty Conclusions and Trauma-Related Guilt Thinking error that contributes to faulty conclusions about knowledge possessed before outcome was known (regarding the foreseeability and preventability of negative outcomes) HB Hindsight-biased thinking Thinking errors that contribute to faulty conclusions about justification or goodness of reasons for acting as one did J#1: Weighing the merits of actions taken against idealized actions that did not exist J#2: Weighing the merits of actions taken against options that only came to mind later J#3: Focusing only on “good” things that might have happened had an alternative action been taken J#4: Tendency to overlook “benefits” associated with actions taken J#5: Failure to compare available options in terms of their perceived probabilities of success before outcomes were known J#6: Failure to realize that (a) acting on speculative hunches rarely pays off, and (b) occurrence of a low-probability event is not evidence that one should have “bet” on this outcome before it occurred J#7: Failure to recognize that different decision-making “rules” apply when time is precious than in situations that allow extended contemplation of options J#8: Failure to recognize that in heightened states of negative arousal, one’s ability to think clearly and make logical decisions is impaired Thinking errors that contribute to faulty conclusions about degree of responsibility for causing negative outcomes R#1: Hindsight-biased thinking R#2: Obliviousness to totality of forces that cause traumatic events R#3: Equating a belief that one could have done something to prevent the traumatic event with a belief that one caused the event R#4: Confusion between responsibility as accountability (e.g., “my job”) and responsibility as having the power to cause or control outcomes R#5: Existential beliefs about accountability and the need to accept the consequences of one’s actions—which fail to take into account the causal power of situational forces Thinking errors that contribute to faulty conclusions about wrongdoing or violation of values W#1: Tendency to conclude wrongdoing on the basis of outcome rather than on the basis of one’s intentions before the outcome was known W#2: Failure to realize that strong emotional reactions are not under voluntary control (i.e., not a matter of choice or willpower) W#3 The tendency to “inflate” the seriousness of a minor moral violation— from “misdemeanor” to “felony” status—when the minor violation leads unforeseeably to a traumatic outcome W#4: Failure to recognize that when all available options have negative outcomes, the least bad option is a sound and moral choice Thinking error that contributes to all of the faulty conclusions ALL1: Belief that an emotional reaction to an idea provides evidence for the idea’s validity—also called emotional reasoning Attitudes About Guilt Survey The Attitudes About Guilt Survey (AAGS) is a brief questionnaire that is used to assess the presence and magnitude of guilt components with regard to highly specific guilt issues (Kubany et al., 1995; Kubany & Manke, 1995; Kubany et al., 2004b). The AAGS, which is reproduced at the end of this chapter in Appendix 11.1, assesses the magnitudes of four guilt-related beliefs and the magnitudes of distress and guilt related to specified guilt issues. Clients are asked to fill out a separate AAGS for each guilt issue tar.geted for intervention, and before each guilt issue is analyzed, they are asked to explain their responses to the guilt-cognition items (items 1–4). In addi.tion to its value for initial assessment, the AAGS can be readministered as therapy proceeds to assess progress, lack of progress, or “slippage” (i.e., reversion to faulty logic that seemed to have been corrected) and the need for additional work. Trauma-Related Guilt Inventory The TRGI (Kubany et al., 1996; Western Psychological Services, 2004) was constructed to assess guilt and cognitive and emotional aspects of guilt asso.ciated with specified traumatic events (e.g., combat, physical or sexual abuse). The TRGI includes three scales and three subscales. The scales include a Global Guilt Scale, a Distress Scale, and a Guilt Cognitions Scale, which includes items that comprise the three subscales—Hindsight-Bias/ Responsibility, Wrongdoing, and Lack of Justification. The TRGI is meant to be used as a molar measure of trauma-related guilt (e.g., combat-related guilt, incest-related guilt) rather than as a measure of more specific guilt issues occurring within the context of the trauma (e.g., guilt about having been afraid or trading places with someone who got killed). The TRGI, which assesses 22 specific trauma-related beliefs, may have considerable util.ity as a treatment-outcome measure in CT-TRG and other cognitive-behav.ioral interventions aimed at modifying trauma survivors’ beliefs about their role in trauma. Guilt Incident Debriefings Prior to CT proper (with each targeted guilt issue), a guilt incident debriefing is conducted. Clients are asked to give a detailed description of what hap.pened during and immediately preceding the event in question (e.g., “Tell me in three-dimensional living color what happened, leading up the exact day and time when you think you should have left your abusive boyfriend”). Clients are asked, “What did you see, hear, feel, and smell? Who did what, who said what, what thoughts were going through your mind?” We have found that detailed retelling of exactly what happened—as opposed to super.ficial retelling—is more likely to facilitate tearful grieving, and is also more likely to yield useful assessment information about distortions in logic (see Kubany, 1998, pp. 150–151). After clients have described what happened, they are asked, “What was the worst part of what happened?” “What were your feelings during the worst part?” and “What were your thoughts during the worst part?” CT Proper After the initial guilt incident debriefing, the therapist discusses the meaning of guilt, its conceptualization as a multidimensional construct, and its various components. Clients are then given an overview of CT-TRG procedures and goals. They are told that they will be involved in an “intellectual analysis,” the goal of which is “to achieve an accurate and objective appraisal of your role in the trauma.” The process of correcting thinking errors associated with faulty conclu.sions is conducted in the context of four semistructured procedures. These four procedures were designed to teach clients to distinguish what they knew then (i.e., at the time of the trauma) from what they know now and as a means to analyze and reappraise perceptions of justification, responsibility, and wrongdoing—in light of knowledge possessed when the trauma occurred. The CT component of CT-TRG is a “successive approximations” approach in which guilt issues are addressed one at a time. With each issue, guilt is broken into its component parts, which are also treated one at a time—in isolation from the other components. The therapist and client actively engage in assessing the client’s beliefs and considering alternative explanations. Much of this process is characterized by a Socratic line of inquiry, during which clients are asked many questions that challenge their logic and noncritical thinking. Correcting Faulty Beliefs about Outcome Foreseeability and Preventability (Hindsight Bias) Because of a common thinking error called “hindsight bias,bias,” trauma sur.vivors commonly believe that unforeseeable traumatic outcomes were fore.seeable and preventable. Hindsight bias is the human tendency to allow knowledge of an event’s outcome to bias recollection of knowledge pos.sessed before the outcome was known (Fischhoff, 1975; Hawkins & Hastie, 1990). The first step in correcting faulty beliefs about outcome foreseeability and preventability is to identify what clients falsely believe they “knew” before outcomes were known, which would have enabled them to prevent or avoid the trauma-related outcome. The second step is to help clients realize that it is impossible for knowledge obtained after making a decision to guide the earlier decision-making process. Clients are then taught about hindsight bias and told anecdotes about trauma survivors who engaged in hindsight-biased thinking. Clients are helped to realize that if they had known in advance what outcome was going occur, they would not have acted as they did, and that an outcome which is not foreseeable is not preventable. Justification Analysis: Were the Reasons for the Actions Taken Good Ones? The “most justified” course of action in a situation is the best course of action among those that were actually considered at the time. A person’s jus.tification for acting as he or she did cannot be weighed against ideal or fan.tasy choices that never existed, or against options that only came to mind later. When all contemplated courses of action have adverse consequences, the course of action with the least negative consequences is the best course of action—and completely justified. In the justification analysis, clients are asked to describe their reasons for acting as they did. Then they are asked what other courses of action they considered but ruled out and to describe what they thought at the time would have happened, had these courses been selected. Finally, clients are asked which choice—of options actually considered—was the most justified choice (knowing only what they knew and believed then); when this line of thinking is pursued, the course of action that was taken is almost always selected as completely justified. Causal Responsibility Analysis Almost all events have multiple contributing causes. In the responsibility analysis, we identify a list of contributing causes outside of self, and we assign a percentage of causation to each. Then we reappraise the client’s share of responsibility in light of the total percentage of contributing causes. Wrongdoing Analysis Clients learn that a value judgment of wrongdoing is usually assigned when someone intentionally or deliberately causes foreseeable harm. Clients are asked whether they knew a negative outcome (which is the source of guilt) was going to occur when they acted as they did and whether they wanted the negative outcome to occur. The answers to these questions are almost always no, to which the therapist might then say that a judgment of wrongdoing does not apply. When clients experience guilt that stems from situations in which all courses of action had negative consequences, they are helped to realize that the least bad choice is a sound and moral choice. CT-TRG as a Treatment for Shame as Well as Guilt CT-TRG is considered to be a treatment for shame as well as guilt because the procedures that impact guilt-related beliefs and guilt also impact shame-related beliefs and shame. That is, guilt-related beliefs (e.g., “I blame myself”) often contribute directly to shame-related beliefs (“I was stupid”; see Kubany & Watson, 2003b), and when guilt-related beliefs are corrected (e.g., “It wasn’t my fault”), the reason for a shame-related nega.tive evaluation ceases to exist. When irrational guilt cognitions are cor.rected, shame often dissipates without any direct intervention. We give one example to illustrate. CT-TRG was the sole intervention employed in treating a Vietnam vet.eran who was troubled by multiple sources of combat-related guilt (Kubany, 1997). The veteran’s scores on a guilt index—averaged for six targeted guilt issues—went from 5.8 (on a scale of 0–6) before therapy to 1.5 after therapy, gains that were maintained for almost 2 years. Even though the intervention focused exclusively on the veteran’s guilt-related beliefs about his role in Viet.nam trauma, his perceptions of the degree to which he considered himself to be a bad person for what he had done changed from “a very bad person” (mean = 2.83 on a 5-point scale from 0 to 4) to “not a bad person” (mean =0) after therapy. Later in this chapter we describe two case studies that illustrate CT.TRG, primarily the procedures for correcting faulty beliefs about foreseeability and preventability. Correcting foreseeability/preventability beliefs often represent a formidable challenge for therapists new to CT-TRG, especially when clients persist in maintaining that they “knew” in advance what was going to happen and could have prevented the trauma-related out.comes. MODIFYING GUILT- AND SHAME-RELATED SELF-TALK Guilt-and shame-related beliefs can have a devastating effect on a person’s mood or state of mind when these beliefs are manifested in conscious thoughts and speech (e.g., “I never should have done that! I am so stupid”). In the early stages of therapy, many clients are extremely self-critical and repeatedly drag themselves down by the way they talk to themselves in their public and private speech. Using procedures that complement CT-TRG, we teach clients to break negative self-talk habits. Early in therapy, we may draw clients’ attention to negative self-talk immediately after it occurs in the session. We may say, “There are certain words and phrases that if you never use again, you will be a happier person. Are you aware of what you just said?” Clients learn that awareness precedes change, and if they are not aware of the negative things that they say to themselves, they are out of control and cannot regulate how they feel. Considerable research has shown that self-monitoring can aid in modify.ing a variety of habits, including ruminative thinking (e.g., Korotitsch & Nel.son-Gray, 1999; Frederiksen, 1975). Clients are given an ongoing homework assignment to monitor three categories of maladaptive self-talk (thoughts and speech). These three categories are (1) the word “should,” the phrases “should have” and “could have,” and “why” questions; (2) global, shame-related put-downs of self (e.g., “I’m stupid . . . I’m a coward”); and (3) saying “I feel . . . ” in sentences that end with words that are not emotions (e.g., “I feel obligated . . . stuck . . . overwhelmed . . . responsible . . . unsafe”). Clients are taught to keep track of these words and phrases during all waking hours for the remainder of therapy, using a Self-Monitoring Recording Form, shown in Figure 11.1. On the form, days are broken into 4-hour blocks, and clients are instructed to record (in code, with numbers 1, 2, or 3) only the first occurrence of each type of statement in the interval in which it is observed to occur (e.g., between 4 P.M. and 8 P.M.). If a type of statement does not occur in an interval, nothing is recorded. The total number of observations (for each type of statement) for each day is the total number out of six daily 4.hour time intervals in which the statement was observed to occur. Requiring individuals to document only the first occurrence of a behavior in each observation interval is easier and elicits greater compliance than procedures that require clients to record every occurrence of a behavior being moni.tored. The therapist emphasizes that heightened awareness of mental activity is a necessary precursor to breaking any self-talk habit, and conscientious per.formance of the self-talk monitoring homework is a means toward that end. Clients are instructed to carry the self-monitoring form with them at all times and to record instances of negative self-talk as soon as they occur. They may be told: “Waiting until later defeats the purpose of the exercise. It may be incon.venient or mildly punishing to write it down at the time. But that’s the idea. Mild punishment may help break the negative self-talk habit.” Clients learn that the first goal of the self-monitoring homework is to increase their awareness of their mental life, and that awareness precedes change. Clients may learn: “After a while you will start catching yourself when you start to think or say these words, and this may interrupt a chain of negative self-talk, which in the past may have had a life of its own—of which you may not even have been aware.” If clients express pessimism about being able to modify the way that they talk to themselves, we ask them if they ever played sports. If they did, and if they had a bad habit, such as a slice in golf or a faulty serve in tennis, we ask them if they would be able to break the habit if they had a good coach and practiced diligently. Clients usually agree that they could break such a habit, and then we may say, “Changing the way that you talk to yourself is exactly the same thing. It simply involves breaking a bad habit.” We ask clients if they would want to go to a therapist who treated them with disrespect—someone who called them stupid and said that they could have and should have prevented trauma-related negative outcomes. Of course, clients say they would not want to go to such a therapist, and then we may say: “If I’m treating you with respect, and you’re treating yourself with disre.spect, we’re canceling each other out. We need to be working together, “on the same side of the ball.” And you need to start giving yourself the same respect you want to get—and deserve to get—from others.” EMPIRICAL OUTCOMES OF CT-TRG CT-TRG is a central feature of cognitive trauma therapy (CTT), a highly psy.choeducational intervention for the treatment of PTSD, depression, and guilt. The efficacy of CTT has been evaluated in two treatment-outcome studies with samples of PTSD-suffering battered women (Kubany et al., 2003, 2004). In both studies, CT-TRG (which was conducted in the larger context of CTT) resulted in quite significant reductions in guilt, as assessed by the TRGI. The studies also found that these reductions in guilt were asso.ciated with significant reductions in PTSD and depression and quite signifi.cant increases in self-esteem. For example, in the first treatment-outcome study (Kubany et al., 2003), 30 of 32 women who completed CTT (94%) were PTSD negative at the end of treatment, and 29 of these women (88%) had scores on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) of 10 or less—showing an absence of depression. There is also some case-study-based evidence for the efficacy of CT.TRG. For example, as described in Kubany (1997), I conducted CT-TRG in a single 7-hour session with a Vietnam combat veteran suffering from multiple sources of Vietnam-related guilt. After therapy, the veteran reported dra.matic reductions in guilt, which were accompanied by the aforementioned reductions in PTSD and depression and increases in self-esteem. In the studies of CT-TRG efficacy conducted thus far, we have not been able to evaluate what precisely about CT-TRG is causing these reductions in PTSD and depression symptomatology, but we believe the CT-TRG is clearly causal effects. Definitive studies have yet to be conducted. SPECIAL ISSUES IN CT-TRG Client Resistance Occasionally, clients resist or are skeptical of therapists’ overtures to treat their guilt, perhaps because they think they “deserve” to feel guilty; or because only someone cold and callous wouldn’t feel guilty about what they did; or because mentally “tricking” oneself into reducing guilt might be thought of as avoiding taking responsibility for what happened, thus a “cop.out”; or because it might be thought of as dishonoring those who didn’t sur.vive or who who suffered more than they did (Kubany & Manke, 1995, pp. 56–57). For example, in the case of a man who accidentally shot and killed a close friend—described later in this chapter—it was inconceivable to this man at the beginning of therapy that he could be taught to experience less guilt— because he believed he “deserved” to feel guilty. Thus, at the beginning of therapy, we do not make direct attempts to get clients to endorse or “buy into” our model of guilt therapy, which gener.ally assumes that survivors tend to experience guilt that has little or no ratio.nal basis. Early on, we might tell clients about the high prevalence of trauma-related guilt and findings that trauma survivors tend to distort or exaggerate the importance of their roles in trauma (see Kubany & Manke, 1995). We also share anecdotes of survivors who experienced guilt, which had abso.lutely no rational basis, and may tell clients, “You probably don’t believe me now, but I am going to show you that your guilt is just as irrational as the guilt of the people in the stories I just told you.” As the psychoeducation in CT-TRG proceeds, clients learn about the thinking errors that lead to guilt (e.g., hindsight-biased thinking) and how these thinking errors may apply to them. Typically, “resistance” that clients have had dissolves as they see and beging to understand how the thinking errors apply to them too. Educational Level Clients Some readers may wonder whether CT-TRG works as well with clients who are less educated or less verbal as it does with more highly educated clients. CT-TRG appears to work equally well regardless of clients’ educational level. For example, in the two-treatment outcome studies of CTT mentioned ear.lier, approximately half of the 162 enrolled women had nor more than a high school education, some, less than that; yet, almost 90% of the women who completed treatment no longer had PTSD at the end of the therapy, and almost all reported substantial reductions in guilt. Principles taught to clients in CT-TRG are easy to grasp and understand because they are relatively simple and straightforward, and are presented in plain language. The emphasis on using survivor anecdotes to illustrate prin.ciples in CT-TRG helps less well-educated clients comprehend the principles. With more well-educated clients, knowledge of the principles tends to remind them of their own anecdotes. The Didactic Nature of CT-TRG CT-TRG tends to have an educational quality, because it involves the trans.mission of large amounts of information. Therapists who are more comfort.able with passive therapy approaches, such as listening or being reflective, than with the kind of active teaching CT-TRG entails may find some diffi.culty getting used to imparting large amounts of information and playing a role that is more didactic or education-oriented. Applications of CT-TRG to Those Who Have Perpetrated Suffering Some readers may be interested in knowing whether CT-TRG is applicable for socially deviant individuals who have intentionally committed acts of vio.lence, such as physical or sexual abuse. Such individuals, often referred to as perpetrators, include murderers, rapists, child molesters, and individuals who abuse or batter their wives and girlfriends. Many such individuals are psycho.paths—with diagnoses of antisocial personality disorder—who exhibit perva.sive empathy deficits, and who may rarely or never experience guilt. As char.acterized in the DSM-IV, they “frequently lack empathy and tend to be callous, cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others” (American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 647). Since distress is a component of guilt, and without distress there can be no guilt, CT-TRG would not be expected to work with perpetrators/psychopathic individuals of this type who do not experience distress or unpleasant feelings when they think about what happened and what they did. However, there are many people who would be considered perpetrators in a sense who do experience genuine guilt about their previous aggressive or antisocial actions. Included in this group are combat veterans who engaged in deliberate brutality or used excessive force in the war zone (e.g., “atrocities”) but who feel bad when they think about what happened. They may even be tormented by guilt. CT-TRG is definitely applicable for such individuals; however, for CT-TRG to be effective, it is crucial for the individ.uals to be able to accurately recall how they felt at the time, and what they knew and believed when they engaged in the brutality or used the excessive force. An example of such a case is a Vietnam War combat veteran I treated, discribed in Kubany (1997). He experienced severe guilt over having muti.lated enemy dead and taking a body part as a war souvenir. He said, “What bothers me so much is . . . that I took a knife and cut off a human ear and wore it on a bracelet around my wrist as a war souvenir. At the time I was proud of it” (p. 235). This veteran was helped to realize that many American troops in Vietnam were impaired in their capacity to experience compas.sion, empathetic distress, and guilt because they had become numbed by the trauma of war. In combination with a certain degree of a social consensus that extreme or brutal behavior mibht be excusable or necessary, the lower.ing of empathy in response to human suffering certainly raised the probabil.ity that extreme or brutal behavior would occur. Similarly, many Americans in Vietnam came to hold the belief about life, death, and human nature that it “don’t mean nothing”—that life (and death) is of little value or importance. One can see how extreme or inhumane behavior may be perceived as justifi.able, once one comes to believe that life has little or no value. In addition, research on cue-controlled aggression has shown that aggressive cues in the environment can “release” impulsive aggressive behavior in individuals who are negatively aroused (e.g., Berkowitz & LePage, 1967; Kubany, Bauer, Pangilinan, Muraoka, & Emiquez, 1995). Circumstances of horror and rage over the gruesome deaths of fellow Americans triggered impulsively hostile behavior, which in retrospect would be considered brutal or overly aggres.sive. TWO CASE STUDIES Man Who Accidentally Shot a Friend When He Was 12 Years Old When Peter was 12 years old, he and one of his closest friends, Tom, were planning to play basketball. When Tom called that morning, Peter suggested that, before they go to play basketball, Tom come to his house briefly to shoot at birds with a 22-gauge rifle his uncle had loaned to his father. Peter’s father had been using the gun to teach Peter about gun safety. No one else was home that day, and Peter knew he was only supposed to use the gun under his father’s supervision; however, he was confident in his ability to use the gun safely. When Tom came over, they crawled out of an upstairs window onto the roof to shoot at birds in the trees. They waited for about 10 minutes but there were no birds, so they crawled back into the house. Peter emptied out the bullets and was about to put the gun away. Then they saw a bird land in a nearby tree, and Peter decided to give it one more chance. Peter put one bul.let back in the chamber, but by the time he turned around, the bird was gone. So he took the bullet out. He had the gun over his shoulder when all of a sudden the gun went off inexplicably. When Peter turned, he saw Tom slumped down in the corner of the room, with blood trickling down his face. Tom never regained consciousness and 2 days later he died. As Peter discovered later, the gun was defective and a bullet remained lodged in the chamber after the rifle was presumably emptied. Unfortu.nately, this fact provided little consolation to Peter. Although many years had passed since the incident, Peter was still tormented by guilt. In fact, his responses on the AAGS reflected extreme distress, extreme guilt, and extreme guilt cognitions. For example, Peter indicated on the AAGS that he “absolutely should have known better” than to play with the gun, was “not justified in any way,” was “completely responsible” for the death of his friend (“100%”), and was “extremely wrong” to have used the gun. Peter was also deeply ashamed about the shooting accident—so much so that it influenced his choice of friends. For years, Peter had associated with a very unsavory cir.cle of friends—high school dropouts and heavy users of alcohol and drugs. Peter thought that he “didn’t deserve” to have friends “with class”—those who were well-educated, sophisticated, and successful. Foreseeability and Preventability Analysis Here we will provide highlights of the CT-TRG foreseeability and prevent-ability analysis conducted with Peter. This analysis was critical in getting Peter to realize that he had played only a minimal role in the death of his friend. We present the analysis as dialogue between Peter and his thera.pist. THERAPIST: What should you have known better? PETER: I should have known better than to play with a firearm. I’m not the first person that that happened to. Happens all the time in the news. I should have known, if you play with guns, somebody is bound to get hurt, or worse. THERAPIST: And what should you have done differently? PETER: Made a better decision. I knew it was stupid and reckless; but I did it anyway, even though part of me was telling me it’s not the right thing to do. Too easy to screw up—way too easy. THERAPIST: And exactly what is it you should have done differently? PETER: I shouldn’t have played with the gun, period, without my dad there. THERAPIST: Exactly what should you have done then? PETER: When Tom called me to go play basketball, I should have gone. THERAPIST: You shouldn’t have suggested he come over? PETER: Right. Because . . . the thought just occurred to me that morning—it’s not as if I planned for him to come over. It was just a secondary thought. An impulse. We knew we were going to the basketball court the night before, so he was just calling me to say, “Let’s go,” and I said, “Hey, before we go ... ” THERAPIST: When did you first realize or learn that you weren’t supposed to say, “Hey, before we go, why don’t you come over here?”? PETER: I knew it even before I said anything—that it was wrong when the idea [for Tom to come over] occurred to me. THERAPIST: We were talking about what negative outcomes were foresee.able. Did you know that Tom was going to die when you invited him over? PETER: No. THERAPIST: OK. So that outcome wasn’t foreseeable. PETER: No, not his death . . . I guess. THERAPIST: What you did know is that you were breaking a rule. PETER: Yeah. THERAPIST: Mischief. A misdemeanor. So that was foreseeable. That’s what you knew. PETER: I had to have known the potential was there because we weren’t play.ing with a basketball; we were playing with a weapon. THERAPIST: Well . . . When did it first occur to you that inviting him over had the potential to cause his death? PETER: Not till I saw blood dripping down into his ear. THERAPIST: That’s exactly right . . . Do you see what’s happening here? What you are doing is remembering yourself knowing something—when you talked to Tom on the telephone—that you didn’t learn until you saw blood dripping down his face. You can’t use knowledge acquired after making a decision to help you make that earlier decision. You can’t use information you acquire on Wednesday to help you with a decision you had to make 2 days earlier on Monday. You can’t use knowledge that the stock market went up 500 points today to help you with an investment decision you made 2 days ago. Did you ever see the TV program Early Edi.tion? PETER: Yes. THERAPIST: The star of the show gets tomorrow’s newspaper today. And because he knows what’s going to happen tomorrow, tomorrow is pre.ventable. And that’s the story line. He spends all day today preventing some bad thing that is going to occur tomorrow, because tomorrow is foreseeable. It’s like having a crystal ball. But we don’t have crystal balls to guide us. Still, we think we do when we engage in hindsight bias. Read the paragraph in your workbook in the middle of the page. PETER: “Hindsight bias occurs when knowledge of an event’s outcome (e.g., ‘who won’) distorts or biases a person’s memory of what (s)he knew before the outcome was known. Hindsight biased thinking is similar to ‘Monday morning quarterbacking’ and is implied by statements such as ‘I should have known better . . . I should have done something differ.ently . . . I saw it coming . . . I knew what was going to happen (before outcomes were known)’ and ‘I could have prevented it.’ As applied to trauma, many survivors falsely believe that the events were foresee.able—hence preventable.” THERAPIST: It’s like having a crystal ball. It’s remembering yourself as being smarter than you were capable of being, as if you knew something you did not find out until later. It’s something that trauma survivors do, but everyone has a tendency to do it; and it has been demonstrated over and over again in studies with college students and other populations. There was even a big review article published about hindsight bias [Hawkins & Hastie, 1990]. Peter’s therapist then illustrated the concept by telling Peter about the type of study that is conducted to demonstrate hindsight bias. THERAPIST: Imagine you’re taking a class in psychology, and everyone in the class volunteers to participate in a research project for extra credit. Your professor then divides the class into three groups and says, “Your task is to predict who is going to win the big game tomorrow. I am going to give you lots of information about the two teams—for example, their win–loss records—and you are to use this information to help you make your predictions. But I’m not going to let you watch the game. Instead, I am going to put you up in three hotel rooms.” On the day after the game, the professor goes into the first room and says, “The red team won. Oops! I wasn’t supposed to tell you that. Disregard what I just said. Just tell me who you think won, based on the information I gave you in class.” Then he goes into the second room and says, “The black team won. Oops! I wasn’t supposed to tell you, so disregard this information. Tell me who won based on the information I gave you.” In the third room the profes.sor simply asks who won without giving the group any information about the game’s outcome. What do you think the predictions were of the three different groups? PETER: The first group would probably choose the red team. The second group would probably choose the black team, and the third would probably be split down the middle. THERAPIST: Right. That’s what most people say. And that’s not too surpris.ing. But what is surprising is what the students say when they are asked, “Did you know my telling you the outcome biased your recollection of who won?” They are unaware that the outcome knowledge affected their recollection of their preoutcome knowledge and may even deny it. If good things happen, there is no problem and the individual can take credit for his or her retrospective wisdom. But if bad things hap.pen, and you’re recalling bad things as foreseeable and preventable, then it’s trouble, and you know exactly where that goes. PETER: Yeah. To further illustrate how hindsight bias works, Peter’s therapist described anecdotes of trauma survivors who engaged in hindsight biased-thinking. In one story he told Peter about three women who had the same guilt issue related to being molested when they were between the ages of 4 and 7 years old by someone who was older but who did not scare them—two father figures, and an older cousin. THERAPIST: When asked, “What is it you should have known better?”, the women all claimed they should have known better than to permit molestation (e.g., “I should have known that a daughter isn’t supposed to have sex with her father”). When asked what she should have done differently, each woman said, “I should have said ‘no’ and not let him do that.” When asked when they first learned or realized they were sup.posed to say “no,” one of the girls laughed nervously and said, “Much later.” One of the other women became confused by this question and started to cry. When asked again, the woman replied that it did not occur to her that she was supposed to say “no” until 4 years later, in sex education class. Peter’s therapist concluded her discussion of foreseeability and prevent-ability with an anecdote about President Harry Truman that illustrates the kind of clear thinking that can inoculate a person from falling into the trap of hindsight-biased thinking in regard to any potential guilt issue. THERAPIST: President Truman was asked by a reporter about 3 years after the end of World War II whether he had made the right decision in ordering the atomic bomb to be dropped on two Japanese cities. If President Truman had been a “should have/could have” kind of guy, do you think he might experience some guilt? PETER: Yeah. THERAPIST: But he seemed to be doing fine, and his clear thinking was reflected in the way he answered the reporter’s question. President Truman purportedly said something to the effect that, “Knowing in 1945 what I know today, maybe I would have, and maybe I wouldn’t have ordered the bomb to be dropped. But I would have to give that a lot of additional thought. However, knowing today only what I knew in 1945, I would do exactly what I did back then.” President Truman could separate what he knew from what he subsequently learned, and he did not allow subsequent knowledge to filter back into his memory of what he knew before he ordered the bombs to be dropped. THERAPIST: I would suggest that there is no possible way you could have known Tom was going to die. Otherwise, you wouldn’t have invited Tom to come to your house. If you knew with certainty, or even thought that there was a remote chance he might die, would you have taken that kind of chance with a close friend’s life? PETER: No way. THERAPIST: No way. No way. You didn’t know what was going to happen. Otherwise, you wouldn’t have done what you did. To reassess Peter’s beliefs about the foreseeability and preventability of Tom’s death, his therapist asked him to reanswer item #1 on the AAGS. THERAPIST: What’s the correct answer, the answer that reality would dictate? PETER: Reality dictates “a” (“There is no possible way I could have known better”). But I still believe I should have known better. THERAPIST: Let’s not confuse bad feelings, the sadness, the grieving—with guilt. By saying “I should have known better,” you’re saying that you were obligated to know something you didn’t know. PETER: I didn’t know that Tom was going to die, but I had to know there was a potential . . . THERAPIST: You had to know? You can only know something if you knew it. If you believed it was going to be dangerous to play with that gun—that you were putting Tom’s life at risk—would you have played with the gun? PETER: No, I wouldn’t have. THERAPIST: Then you can’t say, “I should have. . . . ” We have to analyze the facts. You can only be obligated to do something that you know how to do. You can have an obligation to prevent something only if you know it is going to happen. That was the obligation of the star in the TV series Early Edition, which I told you about earlier. We’re going to come at this from several different directions. Next time, we are going to analyze your beliefs about justification, and your responsibility, and your wrongdoing. But before we end our discussion today, I want to mention one more point about hindsight bias, and why it is so harmful. Hindsight bias not only goes straight to guilt; it also contributes to dis.tortions in the other three guilt-related beliefs. For example, if you think you could have prevented Tom’s death, it’s just a few small steps to, “Therefore, to some extent, I caused his death.” This is a thinking error because to say, “I could have prevented something” is not the same thing as “I caused it.” As one battered woman realized when she said, “You’re right. I didn’t pull his fist into my face.” With respect to wrongdoing, the faulty logic is that wrongdoing is often concluded on the basis of a tragic outcome—even though it was unforeseeable. An example that comes to mind is the case of a man whose 16-year-old daughter died from alcohol poisoning after he put her to bed. This man said, “For the rest of my life, I’m going to have to live with the fact that I murdered my daughter.” That’s condemning him.self to an unforgivable sin when, in fact, he was just being a loving and caring father who put his intoxicated daughter to bed instead of scold.ing her. When do you think he found out he should have walked his daughter around until she sobered up a little? Not till after she was dead, at the very earliest, maybe not until after the autopsy. What are some of the things that you learned today? PETER: We talked about the hindsight bias, which I apparently have a lot of. THERAPIST: You are not alone. PETER: Basically, that I thought I could have prevented something that I did-n’t know was going to happen. THERAPIST: All your answers [on the AAGS] are going to change—based on an analysis of the facts, not based on some kind of subliminal hidden persuasion. PETER: It’s not like I never thought about this. I didn’t know what the out.come was going to be, and I didn’t know the rifle was defective, and Tom didn’t have to say “yes” and come over. But like the woman you told me about who had a stranglehold on guilt, and it took you three sessions to help her get rid of it—I feel like I have a stranglehold. I’ve thought about it a lot, and logically . . . THERAPIST: We can’t do it all at once. PETER: When you tell me stories of other people, I can immediately see their thinking errors—there’s no way they could have foreseen what hap.pened. I can understand feeling bad, but not that bad. But when it’s my story, I feel so incredibly bad. THERAPIST: It goes back to emotional reasoning. The horrible feeling leads to the conclusion that you could have prevented the accident. By the way, you have been engaging in another common thinking error: the tendency to “inflate” the seriousness of a minor moral violation—from “misdemeanor” to “felony” status—when the minor violation leads unforseeably to a traumatic outcome. When someone knew they were breaking a rule, but they didn’t know a tragedy was going to occur, they often consider themselves to have violated a huge value—because of the tragedy. A woman, as a teen, played hooky from school to go to the beach with a much older boyfriend. And he raped her. She said, “I knew I shouldn’t have played hooky. I wouldn’t have been raped if I hadn’t played hooky.” If that relationship had worked out and she had married that guy, do you think that day when she played hooky would have had any significance in her life whatsoever? If nothing bad had happened and she had a great time at the beach, do you think she would feel any guilt about playing hooky that day? PETER: Now that story is a lot closer to my story. THERAPIST: Yeah. Gives you something to think about. I’ve got other stories like that too. Two more sessions were needed to complete the analysis of Peter’s guilt about the shooting accident. Peter’s view of himself changed greatly, as is illustrated by his response to the following statements that he was asked to write at the start and then again at the end of therapy: “I am an innocent sur.vivor and am likable and lovable. I also deserve to be happy!!” At the start of therapy, Peter wrote: “I have a hard time believing this.” Before his last ther.apy session, Peter wrote, “This is the first time since I was a boy that I have believed these statements.” Woman with Guilt and Shame about Not Disclosing Childhood Sexual Abuse Mary, who was in her mid-30s, had a longstanding history of drug abuse and had been in two relationships with boyfriends who were abusive. She had had almost 2 years of “sobriety” when she volunteered to receive cognitive trauma therapy (CTT). Mary was tormented by guilt. First we analyzed her guilt about not breaking off her relationship with an abusive boyfriend sooner. Even though she achieved considerable relief in resolving this issue, the reduction in guilt did not generalize or transfer to her guilt about not disclosing the molesta.tion by her uncle, which occurred the first time when Mary was 7 or 8 years old. This incident occurred when her father, uncle, and other relatives were drinking on the back porch. She was running by when her uncle took her aside, away from the others, and made her sit on his lap. Then he started to touch her inappropriately. Mary said: “I was surprised. It was like, ‘Wow! Why is he doing this?’ And all the while, in the back of my mind, I was thinking, ‘You know, I know this isn’t right, and maybe I should say something to somebody.’ But then I was thinking, ‘Oh, maybe it would be my fault.’ ” Foreseeability and Preventability Analysis Like many trauma survivors, Mary believed that negative outcomes that occurred after her molestation—in Mary’s case, long after her molestation— were foreseeable and preventable when she was a young girl. Following are portions of the foreseeability and preventability analysis conducted with Mary. THERAPIST: What is it that you should have known better? MARY: I should have known better than to let my uncle fool around with me, as far as sex is concerned. THERAPIST: What were some of the negative outcomes that could have been prevented had you disclosed the abuse? MARY: I could have prevented 5 years of molestation and all the guilt and shame that came with it.... Looking back, I should have told my mother the first time it happened. And then there was the time when my sister came home, and my uncle and I were in the house, and I wanted to tell her. I wanted to tell her, but when I looked at him, all pathetic-looking, I said, “Screw it. Just ride it out.” I wanted to say something, but this had gone on for so long. I got myself into this, and hopefully I can get myself out of it, not realizing that today I feel partly responsible for what happened. I know he had a big part of it, but I feel, I also had a part because I let it go on.” THERAPIST: You looked at him, and he looked pathetic? . . . What were your feelings when your sister came in? MARY: Uh, scared. I felt like I didn’t belong. I was different. I was less than.... If anybody knew, they wouldn’t like me. I must be bad. Who else is as low as this? . . . If you murder somebody you can go to jail, you know. What are they going to do with me now? THERAPIST: Worse than stealing. You put it in the same sentence as murder! MARY:(Laughs.) THERAPIST: Who is the victim here? MARY:Uh. ..me. THERAPIST: And what is it you should have done differently? MARY: I should have said something the first time it happened. THERAPIST: Well, when did you first realize or learn that you were supposed to tell your mother that he was molesting you? MARY: I knew then! I knew the first time it occurred. I knew every time it came up. At this point, Mary’s therapist shifted the focus from what Mary knew,to what she didn’t know back then—the outcomes that were unforeseeable when she chose to “ride it out” and keep the molestation a secret. THERAPIST: Many things were completely unforeseeable when you decided to keep the abuse to yourself. Was it foreseeable that it was going to go on for 5 years when you kept it to yourself? MARY: No. THERAPIST: Was it even foreseeable that it was going to happen a second time when you chose not to tell your mother after the first time? MARY: No. I didn’t think he would molest me again. THERAPIST: Was it foreseeable that your opinion of yourself was going to go as low as it could go? MARY: No. THERAPIST: If you had known that it was going to lead to your dropping out of school and getting into drugs when he did it the first time, would you have kept it to yourself? MARY: No, I wouldn’t have. No. THERAPIST: If you had known that each time you didn’t tell your mother, after that first time, that it was going to make you look even guiltier and more implicated, would you have kept it to yourself after the first time? MARY: No. I would have told her. THERAPIST: All right. Now, I want you to answer this question on the Atti.tudes About Guilt Survey again: “To what extent do you think that you should have known better and could have prevented or avoided the outcome?” MARY: The answer is “a”: “There is no possible way I could have known better.” There’s no possible way I could have known all those things were going to happen. THERAPIST: Before we move on, let’s take a look at how false beliefs about foreseeability and preventability not only contribute directly to guilt but also contribute to faulty beliefs about responsibility. If you believe that you “could have prevented” a negative outcome, can you see how easily it would be to then conclude that, to some extent, you caused the outcome? MARY: I understand. Justification Analysis The most justified course of action in any situation is the best course of action among the courses of action actually considered at the time. A per.son’s justification for acting as he or she did cannot be weighed against ideal or fantasy choices which never existed or against options that only came to mind later. When all contemplated courses of action have adverse conse.quences, the course of action with the least negative consequences is the best course of action, and it is completely justified. THERAPIST: What were your reasons for not telling your mom? MARY: I thought she wouldn’t believe me—and then she would tell everyone, and then there would be a big blowout with the family, and then the finger would be pointed toward me. THERAPIST: So here we have a situation in which all courses of action have some negative consequences. There are no unequivocally good choices. When we have a situation in which all courses of action have negative consequences, the best course of action is the one with the least bad consequences—the least negative fallout. Why did you rule out telling your mother? MARY: By keeping it to myself, I thought that the whole incident would blow over, and we would just forget about it. THERAPIST: You made the least bad choice. Do you agree? MARY: I do now. Responsibility Analysis Almost all events have multiple contributing causes. In the responsibility analysis, we identify a list of contributing causes outside of self, and we assign a percentage of causation to each. Then we reappraise the client’s share of responsibility in light of the total percentage of contributing causes. THERAPIST: You indicated that you were 60% responsible for keeping it to yourself. What people, factors, forces—outside of yourself—contributed to your keeping the molestation to yourself? I’ll help you get started. There were a lot of fears. MARY: Fears? THERAPIST: Fear of you being blamed? MARY: Yeah. THERAPIST: And fear of being rejected? MARY: Yeah. THERAPIST: And your fear that everything would explode and your belief that the family would go into turmoil. And your belief that other peo.ple would not only blame you; they would think you were a bad person. MARY: Hmm. THERAPIST: You were taught to believe that if something bad happened, it’s your fault. MARY: I always got blamed if something went wrong. THERAPIST: And you already had a low opinion of yourself. MARY: I wanted to play sports—baseball, track—but my mother wouldn’t let me. She wanted me to be a ballerina. I felt like I wasn’t getting atten.tion from my mother because I didn’t dance. THERAPIST: The withdrawal of attention of your mother . . . all right, here you are. You’re a little child who’s told to go out and play, and nobody’s protecting you or watching after you to be sure no harm comes to you. How much—from 0% to 100%—did your fear of being blamed contribute to your not telling? MARY: I would say 100%. I was really scared. THERAPIST: How about your fear that the family would be thrown into tur.moil? MARY: 100%. THERAPIST: And what about your learning experiences that caused you to have such low self-esteem? MARY: I would say that would be 100% too. THERAPIST: And what about your mother’s disapproval of you and with.drawal of all that attention for not being interested in ballet? MARY: 100%. THERAPIST: We could go on, but let’s add this up. All outside sources of cau.sation add up to—let’see—400%. But it all has to fit into 100%, including the 60% that you said belonged to you. An event cannot be more than 100% caused. How responsible were you for not telling? MARY: Not any. THERAPIST: Let’s say there was a lion outside this room. Do you think that lion would have anything to do with your decision to stay in here? MARY: Oh, yeah. THERAPIST: The lion would be the source of the fear that would keep you in here. You were like a little twig in a 150-mile-per-hour hurricane wind who thinks she’s responsible for all the destruction on the ground. You were like the beautiful oak tree in that storm who thinks she murdered all her leaves. MARY: Yeah. Wrongdoing Analysis Clients learn that a person is ordinarily judged to have committed a wrong.ful act if he or she deliberately causes harm or damage that was foreseeable— for example, intentionally stealing something of value belonging to someone else. In analyzing Mary’s degree of wrongdoing, it became immediately clear that she had had good intentions, and that the terrible consequences of her actions were unforeseeable. THERAPIST: You indicated that what you did was “extremely wrong.” Did you want to cause harm to yourself? MARY: No way. THERAPIST: Was all the harm that ensued foreseeable? MARY: No. THERAPIST: OK. What is the answer to the wrongdoing item on the Attitudes About Guilt Survey? MARY: “A.” “What I did was not wrong in any way.” THERAPIST: Not in any way. You were in a cornered situation—you were trapped. “Terrible things are going to happen if I do this. Terrible things are going to happen if I don’t do this! But which terrible things will I choose?” Somehow, you were fantasizing an ideal choice that would keep everyone happy and stop the abuse. Did that option exist? MARY: No, it didn’t. THERAPIST: It was a fantasy. You were comparing what you did against fan.tasy choices. What are some of the things you learned today? MARY: I learned that I can use what I learned with every guilt issue I have ever had. THERAPIST: That’s right. MARY: And I think I am going to be OK. I am OK. Commentary and Conclusions To correct hindsight-biased thinking, it is critical to identify negative out.comes that were unforeseeable. Recalling unforeseeable outcomes as fore.seeable reflects hindsight-biased thinking, and if outcomes were not foresee.able, they were not preventable. Mary’s therapist established that many important outcomes were not foreseeable when Mary “chose” to keep the molestation a secret after it first happened. Mary did not know that her uncle was going to molest her again, that the abuse was going to continue for 5 years, and that it was going to result in her dropping out of school and engaging in years of drug addiction. In addition, she did not know that, when she was molested on subsequent occasions, it was going to make her appear more implicated and responsible because she didn’t tell her mother after the first time. Mary “knew” that the molestation was “wrong” and that she was “supposed” to tell her mother when it first occurred, but she did not know any of the long-term negative sequelae associated with not telling her mother. In Peter’s case, he did not know the gun was defective when he and Tom tried to shoot at birds. When he decided to use the gun without his par.ents around, he did not know that his friend would die. To say that Peter “should have known” the risk involved does not alter the fact that he did not know the risk. It never occurred to Peter—indeed, it was unthinkable—that Tom would be shot and die when they used the gun that morning. Both Peter and Mary engaged in the thinking error of elevating a rela.tively minor transgression to “felony status” when the minor transgression was followed by a tragic but unforeseeeable outcome. Peter knew that he was breaking a family gun-safety rule when he invited Tom to shoot at birds. He considered this transgression to be a grievous violation of values after Tom was shot and died. In Mary’s case, not telling her mother about the molesta.tion violated a “supposed to” rule. Mary viewed this violation as reflecting a serious character flaw after she became aware of the unforeseeable long-term negative effects of the abuse. The “bottom line” to the successful resolution of guilt is the develop.ment of a full recognition of what one knew and believed at the time of the event. When Mary came to appreciate what she knew and believed as an 8.year-old girl—that disclosing the abuse to her mother would be fraught with negative consequences, whereas if she just kept quiet, the matter would “blow over” and go away—her actions at that time made complete sense. When Peter realized how naïve he was as a 13-year-old boy who believed that he and his close friend were impervious to serious harm—the actions of “that boy” who was Peter seemed reasonable, after all. This conclusion came into clear perspective when Peter was visited by two young nephews who were about the same age as Peter was when the shooting incident had occurred. Peter observed how naïve and carefree his nephews were. He realized that he was not capable, as a 13-year-old boy, of knowing or even imagining beforehand the horrible outcome of that fateful day. In closing, our continuing work with trauma survivors has reinforced our belief that how we think is an important determinant of how we feel, and that how trauma survivors view their role in trauma-related events has a major effect on their recovery from posttraumatic stress. We believe that widespread availability of CT-TRG may enable therapists to help trauma sur.vivors achieve a peace of mind about their role in trauma to a degree that was previously believed unattainable. REFERENCES American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Barrett, K. C. (1995). A functionalist approach to shame and guilt. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embar.rassment, and pride (pp. 25–63). New York: Guilford Press. Berkowitz, L., & Le Page. (1967). Weapons as aggression-eliciting stimuli. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7, 202–207. Brewin, C. R., Dalgleish, T., & Joseph, S. (1996). A dual representation theory of post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Review, 103, 670–686. Dutton, M. A. (1992). Empowering and healing the battered woman: A model for assessment and intervention: A model for assessment and intervention. New York: Springer. Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 319–345. Ferguson, T. J., & Stegge, H. Emotional states and traits in children: The case of guilt and shame. (1995). In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emo.